Brihatparasarahorasastra 


Contents: 

¢ Ch. 1. The Creation 

¢ Ch. 2. Great Incarnations 

¢ Ch. 3. Grah Characters and Description 
¢ Ch. 4. Zodiacal Rasis Described 

* Ch. 5. Special Lagnas 

¢ Ch. 6. The Sixteen Divisions of a Rasi 
¢ Ch. 7. Divisional Considerations 

¢ Ch. 8. Drishtis of the Rasis 


° Ch. 9. Evils at Birth 

¢ Ch. 10. Antidotes for Evils 

¢ Ch. 11. Judgement of Bhavas 

* Ch. 12. Effects of Tanu Bhava 

¢ Ch. 13. Effects of Dhan Bhava 

¢ Ch. 14. Effects of Sahaj Bhava 

¢ Ch. 15. Effects of Bandhu Bhava 

¢ Ch. 16. Effects of Putr Bhava 

¢ Ch. 17. Effects of Ari Bhava 

° Ch. 18. Effects of Yuvati Bhava 

¢ Ch. 19. Effects of Randhr Bhava 

¢ Ch. 20. Effects of Dharm Bhava 

° Ch. 21. Effects of Karm Bhava 

¢ Ch. 22. Effects of Labh Bhava 

* Ch. 23. Effects of Vyaya Bhava 

° Ch. 24. Effects of the Bhava Lords 

¢ Ch. 25. Effects of Non-Luminous Grahas 
¢ Ch. 26. Evaluation of Drishtis of Grahas 
¢ Ch. 27. Evaluation Of Strengths 

¢ Ch. 28. Isht and Kasht Balas 

¢ Ch. 29. Bhava Padas 

¢ Ch. 30. Upa Pad 

¢ Ch. 31. Argala, or Intervention from Grahas 
¢ Ch. 32. Karakatwas of the Grahas 

¢ Ch. 33. Effects of Karakans 

¢ Ch. 34. Yoga Karakas 

¢ Ch. 35. Nabhash Yogas 


° Ch. 
¢ Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
¢ Ch. 
¢ Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 


36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 


Many Other Yogas 

Candr's Yogas 

Surya's Yogas 

Raj Yog 

Yogas For Royal Association 
Combinations for Wealth 
Combinations for Penury 
Longevity 

Marak Grahas 

Avasthas of Grahas 

Dashas of Grahas 

Effects of Dashas 
Distinctive Effects of the Nakshatra Dasha, or of the Dashas of the Lords 


(Vimshottari) of various Bhavas 

* Ch. 49. Effects of the Kaal Chakra 

¢ Ch. 50. Effects of the Char etc. Dashas 

¢ Ch. 51. Working out of Antar Dashas of Grahas and Rasis in Vimshottari etc. 
Dasha systems 


° Ch. 
¢ Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
“Ch; 
° Ch. 
¢ Ch. 
<Ch, 
° Ch. 
= Ch, 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
¢ Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
° Ch. 
¢ Ch. 
° Ch. 
¢ Ch. 
Ch, 


D2. 
33. 
54. 
aD. 
56. 
a1. 
Bios 
a9, 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
a 
Te. 
73: 
74. 
(ee 


Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Stirya (Vimshottari) 
Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Candr 
Effects of Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Mangal 
Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Rahu 
Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Guru 
Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Sani 
Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Budh 
Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Ketu 
Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Sukr 
Effects of Pratyantar Dashas in Antar Dashas 

Effects of Sukshmantar Dashas in Pratyantar Dashas 
Effects of Prana Dashas in Sukshma Dashas 

Effects of Antar Dashas in the Kala Chakr 

Effects of Dashas of Rasis in the Ansas of the Various Rasis 
Ashtaka Varg 

Trikon Shodhana in the Ashtaka Varg 

Ekadhipatya Shodhana in the AshtakaVarg 

Pinda Sadhana in the AshtakaVarg 

Effects of the Ashtaka Varg 

Determination of Longevity through the Ashtaka Varg 
Agegregational Ashtaka Vargas 

Effects of the Rays of the Grahas 

Effects of the Sudarshana Chakr 

Characteristic Features of Panchmahapurushas 


* Ch. 76. Effects of the Elements 

¢ Ch. 77. Effects of the Gunas 

¢ Ch. 78. Lost Horoscopy 

* Ch. 79. Ascetism Yogas 

* Ch. 80. Female Horoscopy 

¢ Ch. 81. Effects of Characteristic Features of Parts of Woman's body. 
* Ch. 82. Effects of Moles, Marks, Signs etc. for Men and Women 
¢ Ch. 83. Effects of Curses in the Previous Birth 

* Ch. 84. Remedial Measures from the Malevolence of Grahas 

¢ Ch. 85. Inauspicious Births 

* Ch. 86. Remedies for Amavasya Birth 

* Ch. 87. Remedies from Birth on Krishna Chaturdashi 

¢ Ch. 88. Remedies from Birth in Bhadra and Inauspicious Yogas 
¢ Ch. 89. Remedies from Nakshatr Birth 

¢ Ch. 90. Remedies from Sankranti Birth 

¢ Ch. 91. Remedies for Birth in Eclipses 

¢ Ch. 92. Remedies from Gandanta Birth 

* Ch. 93. Remedies for Abhukta Mula Birth 

* Ch. 94. Remedies from Jyeshtha Gandanta Birth 

* Ch. 95. Remedies from Birth of a Daughter after Three Sons 

¢ Ch. 96. Remedies from Unusual Delivery 

* Ch. 97. Conclusion 


Ch. 1. The Creation 


I prostrate before the lotus-feet of Lord Vighneswara, offspring of Uma, the cause of 
destruction of sorrow, who is served by Mahabhutas (the five great elements of the 
universe) etc., who has the face of a tusker and who consumes the essence of Kapittha 
and Jambu fruits. 


1-4. Offering his obeisance to all-knowing Maharishi Parasar and with folded hands, 
Maitreya said: “O venerable Maharishi, Jyotish, the supreme limb of the Vedas, has 
three divisions, viz. Hora, Ganita and Samhita. Among the said three divisions Hora, or 
the general part of Jyotish is still more excellent. I desire to know of its glorious aspects 
from you. Be pleased to tell me, how this Universe is created? How does it end? What is 
the relationship of the animals, born on this earth, with the heavenly bodies? Please 
speak elaborately” 


5-8. Maharishi Parasar answered. O Brahmin, your query has an auspicious purpose in it 
for the welfare of the Universe. Praying Lord Brahma and Sri Sarasvati, his power (and 
consort) and Surya, the leader of the Grahas and the cause of Creation, I shall proceed to 


narrate to you the science of Jyotish, as heard through Lord Brahma. Only good will 
follow the teaching of this Vedic Science to the students, who are peacefully disposed, 
who honour the preceptors (and elders), who speak only truth and are godfearing. 
Woeful forever, doubtlessly, will it be to impart knowledge of this science to an 
unwilling student, to a heterodox and to a crafty person. 


9-12. Sri Vishnu, who is the Lord (of all matters), who has undefiled spirit, who is 
endowed with the three Gunas, although he transcends the grip of Gunas (Gunatita), 
who 1s the Author of this Universe, who is glorious, who is the Cause and who is 
endowed with valour, has no beginning. He authored the Universe and administers it 
with a quarter of his power. The other three quarters of Him, filled with nectar, are 
knowable only to the philosophers (of maturity). The Principal Evolver, who is both 
perceptible and imperceptible in Vasudeva. The Imperceptible part of the Lord is 
endowed with dual powers, while the Perceptible with triple powers. 


13-15. The three powers are Sri Shakti (Mother Lakshmi) with Sattva-Gun, Bhi Shakti 
(Mother-Earth) with Rajo-Gun and Nil Shakti with Tamo-Gun. Apart from the three, the 
fourth kind of Vishnu, influenced by Sri Shakti and Bhoo Shakti, assumes the form of 
Shankarshan with Tamo-Gun, of Pradyumna with Rajo-Gun and of Anirudh with Sattva- 
Gun. 


16-17. Mahatatwa, Ahamkar and Ahamkar Murti and Brahma, are born from 
Shankarshan, Pradyumna and Anirudh, respectively. All these three forms are endowed 
with all the three Gunas, with predominance of the Gun due to their origin. 


18-19. Ahamkar is of three classes, i.e. with Sattvic, Rajasic and Tamasic dispositions. 
Divine class, sensory organs and the five primordial compounds (space, air, fire, water 
and earth) are, respectively, from the said three Ahamkaras. 


20. Lord Vishnu, coupled with Sti Shakti, rules over the three worlds. Coupled with 
Bhoo Shakti, He is Brahma causing the Universe. Coupled with Neel Shakti, He is 
Shiva, destroying the Universe. 


21-24. The Lord is in all beings and the entire Universe is in Him. All beings contain 
both Jivatma and Paramatmansas. Some have predominance of the former, while yet 
some have the latter in predominance. Paramatmans is predominant in the Grahas, viz. 
Surya etc. and Brahma, Shiva and others. Their powers, or consorts too have 
predominance of Paramatmans. Others have more of Jivatmans. 


Ch. 2. Great Incarnations 


1. Maitreya: “O Maharishi ParaSar, are the incarnations of Vishnu, viz. Sr1 Ram, Sri 


Krishn etc., endowed with Jivans? 


2. Maharishi Parashar: “O Brahmin, the four incarnations, viz. Ram, Krishn, Narasimh 
and Varah are wholly with Paramatmans. The other incarnations (than these, out of the 
ten) have in them Jivans too. 


3-4. The unborn Lord has many incarnations. He has incarnated, as the 9 (Nava) Grahas 
to bestow on the living beings the results due to their Karmas. He is Janardan. He 
assumed the auspicious form of Grahas to destroy the demons (evil forces) and sustain 
the divine beings. 


5-7. From Surya the incarnation of Ram, from Candr that of Krishn, from Mangal that of 
Narasimh, from Budh that of Buddha, from Guru that of Vaman, from Sukr that of 
Parashuram, from Sani that of Kurma (Tortoise), from Rahu that of Varah (Pig) and from 
Ketu that of Meen (Fish) occurred. All other incarnations than these also are through the 
Grahas. The beings with more Paramatmans are called divine beings. 


8-13. The beings with more Jivatmans are (mortal) beings. The high degree of 
Paramatmans from the Grahas, viz. Surya etc. did incarnate, as Ram, Krishn etc. After 
completing the mission, the Paramatmansas (of the respective) Grahas again merge (in 
the respective) Grahas. The Jivatma portions from the Grahas take births, as human 
beings and live their lives according to their Karmas and again merge in the Grahas. And 
at the time of Great Destruction the Grahas as well merge in Lord Vishnu. The one, who 
knows of all these, will become versed in the knowledge of the past, present and future. 
Without a knowledge of Jyotish these cannot be known. Hence, everyone should have a 
knowledge of Jyotish, particularly the Brahmin. The one, who, devoid of knowledge of 
Jyotish, blames this Vedic Science will go to the hell called ‘Raurava’ and will be reborn 
blind. 


Ch. 3. Grah Characters and Description 


1. Maitreya: “O Maharishi, you have affectionately explained about the incarnations of 
Grahas. Now kindly detail their characters and dispositions. 


2-3. Parasar: “O Brahmin, listen to the account of placement of the heavenly bodies. Out 
of the many luminous bodies sighted in the skies some are stars, yet some are Grahas. 
Those, that have no movements, are the Nakshatras (asterisms). 


4-6. Those are called ‘“Grahas’, that move through the Nakshatras (or stellar mansions) in 
the zodiac. The said zodiac comprises of 27 Nakshatras commencing from Ashvini. The 
same area is divided in 12 parts equal to 12 ‘Rasis’ commencing from Mesh. The names 
of the Grahas commence from Surya. The R&si rising is known, as “‘Lagn’. Based on 


Lagn and the Grahas, joining and departing from each other, the native’s good and bad 
effects are deducted. 


Addition from Santhanam till Sloka 7. The names of the 27 Nakshatras are Ashvini, 
Bharani, Krittika, Rohini, Mrigasira, Ardra, Punarvasu, Pushya, Aslesha, Magha, 
Purvaphalguni, Uttaraphalguni, Hasta, Chitra, Swati, Vishaka, Anuradha, Jyeshtha, 
Mula, Purvashadh, Uttarashadh, Shravana, Dhanishtha, Satabhisha, Purvabhadra, 
Uttarabhadra, Revati. 


Lagn is a very important point in the horoscope. It is the Rasi, that rises in the East, on 
the latitude of birth. The apparent rising of a Rasi is due to the rotation of the earth on its 
own axis at arate of motion, causing every degree of the zodiac seemingly ascend on the 
eastern horizon. 


Approximately, two hours are required for a Rasi to pass via the horizon, thereby every 
degree taking four minutes to ascend. This duration, however, is actually dependent on 
the concerned latitude. 


Actually Strya has no motion. His motion is an apparent one, as viewed from the 
rotating earth. Other Grahas, including the nodes, have varied rates of motion. The 
average daily motions of the Grahas, which are not, however standard, are, as follows: 
Surya 1, Candr 13-15, Mangal 30-45’, Budh 65-100’, Sukr 62-82’, Guru 5-15’, Sani 2’, 
Rahu/Ketu 3’. 


With such different motions, a Grah forms various Drishtis with others. These Drishtis 
through longitudinal distances have a great deal of utility in Jyotish. This is what 
Maharishi Parashar suggests to be considered. 


7. Details (of astronomical nature) of stars have to be understood by general rules, while 
I narrate to you about the effects of Grahas and Rasis. 


8-9. The positions of the Grahas for a given time be taken, as per Drikganit. And with 
the help of Rasi durations, applicable to the respective places, Lagn at birth should be 
known. Now, I tell you about the castes, descriptions and dispositions of the Grahas. 


10. Names of Grahas. The names of the nine Grahas, respectively, are Surya, Candr, 
Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr, Sani, Rahu and Ketu. 


11. Benefics and Malefics. Among these, Siirya, Sani, Mangal, decreasing Candr, Rahu 
and Ketu (the ascending and the descending nodes of Candr) are malefics, while the rest 
are benefics. Budh, however, is a malefic, if he joins a malefic. 


Addition from Santhanam till Sloka 12-13. When Candr is ahead of Surya, but within 
120, she has medium strength. Between 120 to 240 she is very auspicious,( see 
‘Atishubhapred’). From 240 to 0 she is bereft of strength. This is Yavanas’ view, vide P. 
70 of my English 


Translation of Saravali. This view is, however, related to Candr’s strength, or otherwise, 
while waning Candr (Krishna Paksh, dark half) is a malefic and waxing Candr (Shukla 
Paksh, bright half) is a benefic. Should Candr be Yuti with a benefic, or receiving a 
Drishti from a benefic, she turns a benefic, even if in a waning state. As regards Budh, 
we have clear instructions from Maharishi Parashar, that he becomes a malefic, if he 
joins a malefic. If waning Candr and Budh are together, both are benefics. 


12-13. Grah governances. Surya is the soul of all. Candr is the mind. Mangal is one’s 
strength. Budh is speech-giver, while Guru confers Knowledge and happiness. Sukr 
governs semen (potency), while Sani denotes grief. 


14-15. Grah cabinet. Of royal status are Surya and Candr, while Mangal is the Army 
chief. Prince-apparent is Budh. The ministerial Grahas are Guru and Sukr. Sani is a 
servant. Rahu and Ketu form the Grah Army. 


16-17. Complexions of Grahas. Siirya is blood-red. Candr is tawny. Mangal, who is not 
very tall is blood-red, while Budh’s hue is akin to that of green grass. Tawny, variegated 
and dark are Guru, Sukr and Sani in their order. 


18. Deities of Grahas. Fire (Agni) (?), Water (Varuna), Subrahmanya (Lord Shiva’s son, 
following Ganesh), Maha Vishnu, Indra, Shachi Devi (the consort of Lord Indra) and 
Brahma (?) are the presiding deities of the 7 Grahas in their order. 


19. Gender of the Grahas. Budh and Sani are neuters. Candr and Sukr are females, while 
Surya, Mangal and Guru are males. 


20. Primordial compounds. The Panchabhutas, space, air, fire, water and earth, are, 
respectively, governed by Guru, Sani, Mangal, Sukr and Budh. 


21. Castes of Grahas. Guru and Sukr are Brahmins. Surya is a royal Grah, while Candr 
and Budh belong to commercial community. Sani rules the Sudras (4th caste). 


22. Sattvic Grahas are the luminaries and Guru, Sukr and Budh are Rajasik, while 
Mangal and Sani are Tamasic. 


23. Description of Sirya. Sirya’s eyes are honey-coloured. He has a square body. He is 
of clean habits, bilious, intelligent and has limited hair (on his head). 


24. Description of Candr. Candr is very windy and phlegmatic. She is learned and has a 
round body. She has auspicious looks and sweet speech, is fickle-minded and very 
lustful. 


25. Description of Mangal. Mangal has blood-red eyes, is fickle-minded, liberal, bilious, 
given to anger and has thin waist and thin physique. 


26. Description of Budh. Budh is endowed with an attractive physique and the capacity 
to use words with many meanings. He is fond of jokes. He has a mix of all the three 
humours. 


27. Description of Guru. Guru has a big body, tawny hair and tawny eyes, is phlegmatic, 
intelligent and learned in Shastras. 


28. Description of Sukr. Sukr is charming, has a splendourous physique, is excellent, or 
great in disposition, has charming eyes, is a poet, is phlegmatic and windy and has curly 
hair. 


29. Description of Sani. Sani has an emaciated and long physique, has tawny eyes, is 
windy in temperament, has big teeth, is indolent and lame and has coarse hair. 


30. Description of Rahu and Ketu. Rahu has smoky appearance with a blue mix 
physique. He resides in forests and is horrible. He is windy in temperament and is 
intelligent. Ketu is akin to Rahu. 


31. Primary ingredients (or Sapth Dhatus). Bones, blood, marrow, skin, fat, semen and 
muscles are, respectively, denoted by the Grahas: Surya, Candr, Mangal, Budh, Guru, 
Sukr and Sani. 


32. Abodes of the Grahas. Temple, watery place, place of fire, sport-ground, treasure- 
house, bed-room and filthy ground: these are, respectively, the abodes for the seven 
Grahas from Sirya onward. 


33. Grah periods. Ayan, Muhurta, a day (consisting day and night), Ritu, month, 
fortnight and year: these are the periods allotted to the Grahas from Sirya to Sani. 


34. Tastes of the Grahas. Pungent, saline, bitter, mixed, sweet, acidulous and astringent 
are, respectively, tastes lorded by Surya, Candr, Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr and Sani. 


35-38. Strengths of Grahas. Strong in the East are Budh and Guru. Strya and Mangal are 
so in the South, while Sani is the only Grah, that derives strength in the West. Candr and 


Sukr are endowed with vigour, when in the North. Again, strong during night are Candr, 
Mangal and Sani, while Budh is strong during day and night. The rest (i.e. Guru, Sirya 
and Sukr) are strong only in daytime. During the dark half malefics are strong. Benefics 
acquire strength in the bright half of the month. Malefics and benefics are, respectively, 
strong in Dakshinayan and Uttarayan. The Lords of the year, month, day and Hora (hour 
of Grah) are stronger than the other in ascending order. Again, stronger than the other in 
the ascending are Sani, Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr, Candr and Surya. 


39-40. Related to trees. Siirya rules strong trees (i.e. trees with stout trunks), Sani useless 
trees, Candr milky trees (and rubber yielding plants), Mangal bitter ones (like lemon 
plants), Sukr floral plants, Guru fruitful ones and Budh fruitless ones. 


41-44. Other matters. Rahu rules the outcaste, while Ketu governs mixed caste. Sani and 
the nodes indicate ant-hills. Rahu denotes multi-coloured clothes and Ketu rags. Lead 
and blue gem belong to Rahu and Ketu. Strya, Candr, Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr and 
Sani in their order govern red silken, white silken, red, black silken, saffron, silken and 
multi-coloured robes. 


45-46. Seasons of Grahas. Vasanta, Greeshma, Varsh, Sarad, Hemanta and Sisir are the 
six Ritus (or seasons), respectively, governed by Sukr, Mangal, Candr, Budh, Guru and 
Sani. Rahu and Ketu denote 8 months and 3 months, respectively. 


47. Dhatu, Mool and J iva Divisions. Dhatu Grahas are Rahu, Mangal, Sani and Candr, 
while Stirya and Sukr are Mula Grahas. Budh, Guru and Ketu rule Jivas. 


48. Age. Out of all the Grahas Sani is the eldest. He bestows maximum number of years 
in Naisargik Dasha. 


49-50. Exaltation and Debilitation. For the seven Grahas, from Surya on, the exaltation 
Rasis are, respectively, Mesh, Vrishabh, Makar, Kanya, Kark, Meen and Tula. The 
deepest exaltation degrees are, respectively, 10, 3, 28, 15, 5, 27 and 20 in those Rasis. 
And in the seventh Rasi from the said exaltation Rasi each Grah has its own debilitation. 
The same degrees of deep exaltation apply to deep fall. 


51-54. Additional Dignities. In Simh the first 20 degrees are Stirya’s Mooltrikon, while 
the rest is his own Bhava. After the first 3 degrees of exaltation portion in Vrishabh, for 
Candr, the rest is her Mooltrikon. Mangal has the first 12 degrees in Mesh, as 
Mooltrikon with the rest therein becoming simply his own Bhava. For Budh, in Kanya 
the first 15 degrees are exaltation zone, the next 5 degrees Mooltrikon and the last 10 
degrees are own Bhava. The first one third of Dhanu is the Mooltrikon of Guru, while 
the remaining part thereof is his own Bhava. Sukr divides Tula into two halves keeping 
the first, as Mooltrikon and the second, as own Bhava. Sani’s arrangements are same in 


Kumbh, as Surya has in Simh. 


55. Natural Relationships. Note the Rasis, which are the 2nd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th and 12th 
from the Mooltrikon of a Grah. The Grahas ruling such Rasis are its friends, apart from 
the Lord of its exaltation Rasi. Lords other than these are its enemies. If a Grah becomes 
its friend as well, as its enemy (on account of the said two computations), then it is 
neutral, or equal. 


56. Temporary Relationships. The Grah, posited in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 10th, 11th, or the 
12th from another, becomes a mutual friend. There is enmity otherwise. (This applies to 
a given Janm Kundali) 


57-58. Compound Relationship. Should two Grahas be naturally and temporarily 
friendly, they become extremely friendly. Friendship on one count and neutrality on 
another count make them friendly. Enmity on one count combined with affinity on the 
other turns into equality. Enmity and neutralship cause only enmity. Should there be 
enmity in both manners, extreme enmity is obtained. The Jyotishi should consider these 
and declare horoscopic effects accordingly. 


59-60. Ratio of Effects. A Grah in exaltation gives fully good effects, while in 
Mooltrikon it is bereft of its auspicious effects by one fourth. It is half beneficial in its 
own Bhava. Its beneficence is one fourth in a friendly Rasi. In an equal’s Rasi one eighth 
of auspicious disposition is useful. The good effects are nil in debilitation, or enemy’s 
camp. Inauspicious effects are quite reverse with reference to what is stated. 


61-64. Non-luminous UpaGrahas (Sub-Grahas). Add 4 Rasis 13 degrees and 20 minutes 
of arc to Stirya’s longitude at a given moment to get the exact position of the all 
inauspicious Dhoom. Reduce Dhoom from 12 RaAasis to arrive at Vyatipat. Vyatipat is also 
inauspicious. Add six Rasis to Vyatipat to know the position of Parivesh. He is 
extremely inauspicious. Deduct Parivesh from 12 RAsis to arrive at the position of Chap 
(Indra Dhanus), who is also inauspicious. Add 16 degrees 40 minutes to Chap, which 
will give Ketu (UpaKetu), who is a malefic. By adding a Rasi to UpaKetu, you get the 
original longitude of Stirya. These are the Grahas, devoid of splendour, which are 
malefics by nature and cause affliction. 


65. Effects of Sub-Grahas. If one of these afflicts Siirya, the native’s dynasty will 
decline, while Candr and Lagn, respectively, associated with one of these, will destroy 
the longevity and wisdom. So declared Lord Brahma, the Lotus-Born. 


66-69. Calculations of Gulik etc. The portions of Sirya etc. up to Sani denote the 
periods of Gulik and others. Divide the day duration (of any week day) into eight equal 
parts. The eighth portion is Lord-less. The seven portions are distributed to the seven 


Grahas commencing from the Lord of the week day. Whichever portion is ruled by Sani, 
will be the portion of Gulik. Similarly make the night duration into eight equal parts and 
distribute these, commencing from the Lord of the Sth (by) week. Here again, the eighth 
portion is Lord-less, while Sani’s portion is Gulik. Siirya’s portion is Kaal, Mangal’s 
portion is Mrityu, Guru’s portion is Yamaghantak and Budh’s portion is Ardhaprahar. 
These durations differently apply to different places (commensurate with variable day 
and night durations). 


70. Gulik’s Position. The degree, ascending at the time of start of Gulik’s portion (as 
above), will be the longitude of Gulik at a given place. Based on this longitude only, 
Gulik’s effects for a particular nativity be estimated. 


71-74. Calculation of Pranapad. Convert the given time into Vighatis and divide the 
same by 15. The resultant Rasi, degrees etc. be added to Siirya, if he is in a Movable 
Rasi, which will yield Pranapad. If Stirya is in a Fixed Rasi, add 240 degrees 
additionally and, if in a Dual Rasi, add 120 degrees in furtherance to get Pranapad. The 
birth will be auspicious, if Pranapad falls in the 2nd, 5th, 9th, 4th, 10th, or 11th from the 
natal Lagn. In other Bhavas Pranapad indicates an inauspicious birth. 


Notes. Ardhaprahar, Yamaghantak, Mrityu, Kaal and Gulik are the 5 Kaal Velas, 
suggested by Maharishi Parashar. The day duration, according to altitude, is divided into 
eight equal parts. The eighth portion is unlorded. The first portion is allotted to the 
weekday Lord. Other portions follow in the order of weekday Lords. We consider 5 
portions of Grahas, ignoring that of Candr and Sukr. The portions of Siirya, Mangal, 
Budh, Guru and Sani are, respectively, called Kaal, Mrityu, Ardhaprahar, Yamaghantak 
and Gulik. 


In the case of night the durations, or 1/8th parts are allotted in a different order. The first 
portion goes to the Grah, ruling the Sth weekday Lord, counted from the day in question. 
The others follow in the usual order. Here again, the 8th part is Lord-less. The portions 
of Grahas from Kaal to Gulik are the same in nomenclature in the night also. 


Keeranuru NataRaja of Jatakalankaram (Tamil version) gives Rasis of dignities for these 
UpaGrahas and Gulik etc. (UpaGrah & Gulik etc.: Exaltation, Debilitation, Swakshetra 
(own Rasi)) Dhoom: Simh, Kumbh, Makar; Vyatipat: Vrischik, Vrishabh, Mithun; 
Parivesh: Mithun, Dhanu, Dhanu; Indrachap: Dhanu, Mithun, Kark; UpaKetu: Kumbh, 
Simh, Kark; Gulik: -, -, Kumbh; Yamaghantak: -, -, Dhanu; Ardhaprahar: -, -, Mithun; 
Kaal: -, -, Makar; Mrityu: -, -, Vrischik. 


From Siirya to Sani no one is exalted in the above-mentioned exaltation Rasis, nor 
debilitated in the above-mentioned debilitation Rasis. 


Out of the 5 Kaal Velas, viz. Gulik etc., four except Kaal (related to Stirya) have their 
own Ragi system in the respective Rasis, ruled by their fathers. Gulik, son of Sani, has 
Kumbh, as his own Bhava. Guru’s son, Yamaghantak, has it in Dhanu. Ardhaprahar, 
Budh’s son, is in 


own Rasi, if in Mithun. Mrityu, son of Mangal, has Vrischik, as own Bhava. It is not 
known, why Kaal, a son of Sirya shifted to Makar, a Rasi of his brother (Sani), leaving 
his father’s Simh. Obviously, Sani has given his Mooltrikon to his son Gulik, while he 
gave Makar (a secondary R4si) to his ‘brother’ Kaal. 


Ch. 4. Zodiacal Rasis Described 


1-2. Importance of Hora. The word Hora is derived from Ahoratr after dropping the first 
and last syllables. Thus Hora (Lagnas) remains in between Ahoratr (i.e. day and night) 
and after knowing Hora the good and bad effects of a native be known. Sri Vishnu, the 
Invisible is Time personified. His limbs are the 12 Rasis, commencing from Mesh. 


3. Names of Rasis. The 12 Rasis of the zodiac in order are Mesh, Vrishabh, Mithun, 
Kark, Simh, Kanya, Tula, Vrischik, Dhanu, Makar, Kumbh and Meen. 


4-4'4, Limbs of Kaal Purush. Kaal Purush (or Time personified) has his limbs, as under 
with reference to the 12 RaSis, respectively: Head, face, arms, heart, stomach, hip, space 
below navel, privities, thighs, knees, ankles and feet. 


5-5'/. Classification of Rasis. Movable, Fixed and Dual are the names given to the 12 
Rasis in order. These are again known, as malefic and benefic, successively. Similarly 
are male and female. Mesh, Simh and Dhanu are bilious. Vrishabh, Kanya and Makar 
are windy. Mithun, Tula and Kumbh are mixed, while the rest are phlegmatic. 


6-7. Mesh described. The Mesh is blood-red in complexion. It has a prominent (big) 
physique. It is a quadruped Rasi and strong during night. It denotes courage. It resides in 
the East and is related to kings. It wanders in hills and predominates in Rajo-Gun (the 
second of the three constituent qualities and the cause of great activity in living beings). 
It rises with its back (a Prishtodaya Rasi) and is fiery. Its ruler is Mangal. 


8. Vrishabh described. Vrishabh’s complexion is white and it is lorded by Sukr. It is long 
and is a quadruped R&si. It has strength in night and resides in the South. It represents 
villages and businessmen. An earthy R4asi, Vrishabh rises with its back. 


9-9'4. Mithun described. The Rasi Mithun rises with its head and represents a male and a 
female, holding a mace and lute. It lives in the West and is an airy RAsi. It is a biped Rasi 
as well and is strong in nights. It lives in villages and is windy in temperament. It has an 


even body with a green (grass like) hue. Its ruler is Budh. 


10-11. Kark described. The Rasi Kark is pale-red. It resorts to forests and represents 
Brahmins. It is strong in nights. It has many feet (1.e. it is a centipede Rasi) and has a 
bulky body. It is Sattvic in disposition (seen in gods) and it is a watery Rasi. It rises with 
its back and is ruled by Candr. 


12. Simh described. Simh is ruled by Surya and is Sattvic. It is a quadruped R4asi and a 
royal Rasi. It resorts to forests and rises with its head. It has a large, white body. It 
resides in the East and is strong during daytime. 


13-14. Kanya described. This R4si is a hill-resorter and is strong in daytime. It rises with 
its head and has a medium build. It is a biped R4si and resides in the South. It has grains 
and fire 


in its hands. It belongs to the business community and is variegated. It relates to 
hurricanes (‘Prabharanjani’). It is a Virgin and is Tamasic (a disposition of demons). Its 
ruler is Budh. 


15-164. Tula described. Tula is a Seershodaya RAsi, rising with its head; Tula is strong 
in daytime. It is black in complexion and is predominant with Rajo-Gun. It relates to the 
western direction and resorts to land. It is destructive, or mischievous (“Dhatin’). It 
represents Sudras, or the 4th Varna. It has a medium build physique and is a biped Rasi. 
Its Lord is Sukr. Vrischik described. Vrischik has a slender physique and is a centipede 
Rasi. It denotes Brahmins and resides in holes. Its direction is North and it is strong in 
daytime. It is reddish-brown and resorts to water and land. It has a hairy physique and is 
very sharp (or passionate). Mangal is its ruler. 


17-18’. Dhanu described. The Rasi Dhanu rises with its head and is lorded by Guru. It 
is a Sattvic Rasi and is tawny in hue. It has strength in night and is fiery. A royal Rasi, 
Dhanu is biped in first half. Its second half is quadruped. It has an even build and adores 
an arch. It resides in the East, resorts to land and is splendourous. 


19-20. Makar described. Makar is lorded by Sani and has predominance of Tamo-Gun (a 
disposition, seen in demons). It is an earthy Rasi and represents the southern direction. It 
is strong in nights and rises with back. It has a large body. Its complexion is variegated 
and it resorts to both forests and lands. Its first half is quadruped and its second half 
footless, moving in water. 


21-21'4. Kumbh described. The Rasi Kumbh represents a man holding a pot. Its 
complexion is deep-brown. It has medium build and is a biped Rasi. It is very strong in 
daytime. It resorts to deep water and is airy. It rises with its head and is Tamasic. It rules 


Sudras, the 4th Varna and the West. Its Lord is Sani, Stirya’s offspring. 


22-24. Meen described. Meen resembles a pair of fish, one tailed with the head of the 
other. This RAsi is strong at night. It is a watery Rasi and is predominant with Sattva- 
Gun. It denotes resoluteness and is a water-resorter. It is footless and has a medium 
build. It rules the North and rises with both head and back. It is ruled by Guru. This is 
how the twelve Rasis, each of 30 degrees extent, are described to evaluate gross and 
specific effects. 


25-30. Nishek Lagn. O excellent of Brahmins, now is a step explained to arrive at the 
Nishek Lagn, when the natal Lagn is known. Note the angular distance between Sani 
and Mandi (Gulik). Add this to the difference between the Lagn Bhava (Madhya, or 
cusp) and the 9th Bhava (cusp). The resultant product in Rasis, degrees etc. will 
represent the months, days etc., that elapsed between Nishek and birth. At birth, if Lagn 
Lord is in the invisible half (i.e. from Lagn cusp to descendental cusp), add the degrees 
etc., Candr moved in the particular Rasi, occupied by her, to the above-mentioned 
product. Then Lagn at Nishek can be worked out and the good and bad, experienced by 
the native in the womb, can be guessed. One can also guess with the help of Nishek 
Lagn effects, like longevity, death etc. of the parents. 


Ch. 5. Special Lagnas 


1. Oh excellent of the Brahmins, I explain below again some special Lagnas, viz. Bhava 
Lagn, Hora Lagn and Ghati Lagn. 


2-3. Bhava Lagn. From sunrise to the time of birth every 5 Ghatis (or 120 minutes) 
constitute one Bhava Lagn. Divide the time of birth (in Ghatis, Vighatis etc.) from 
sunrise by 5 and add the quotient etc. to Stirya’s longitude, as at sunrise. This is called 
Bhava Lagn. 


4-5. Hora Lagn. Again from sunrise till the time of birth Hora Lagn repeats itself every 
2'4 Ghatis (1. e. 60 minutes). Divide the time past up to birth from sunrise by 2 and add 
the quotient etc. in Rasis, degrees and so on to the longitude of Surya, as at the sunrise. 
This will yield Hora Lagn in R&si, degrees etc. 


6-8. Ghati Lagn (Ghatik Lagn). Now listen to the method of working out Ghati Lagn. 
This Lagn changes along with every Ghati (24 minutes) from the sunrise. Note birth 
time in Ghatis and Vighatis. Consider the number of Ghatis past, as number of RAsis, or 
Ghati Lagnas. The Vighatis be divided by 2 to arrive at degrees and minutes of arc, past 
in the said Ghati Lagn. The product so arrived in Rasis, degrees and minutes be added to 
Surya’s longitude, as at sunrise, to get the exact location of Ghati Lagn. So say 
Maharishis, like Narada. 


9. Use of Special Lagnas. Keeping the Grahas at birth, as it is, prepare various Bhava 
Kundalis with respect to each special Lagn and analyze, as done for the natal Lagn. 


10-13’4. Varnad Dasha. I now detail Varnad Dasha, just by knowing which one can deal 
with the longevity of a native. If the natal Lagn is an odd RAsi, count directly from Mesh 
to natal Lagn. If the natal Lagn is an even Rasi, count from Meen to the natal Lagn in 
the reverse order. Similarly, if the Hora Lagn is an odd one, count from Mesh to Hora 
Lagn in direct order. If the Hora Lagn is an even one, count from Meen to Hora Lagn in 
the reverse order. If both the products are odd Rasis, or even RAsis, then add both the 
figures. If one is odd and the other is even, then know the difference between the two 
products. If the latest product in this process is an odd one, count so many R&sis from 
Mesh in a direct manner; if an even one, count so many RAasis from Meen in reverse 
order. The Rasi so known will be the Varnad for Lagn. 


14-15. Effects of Varnad. Now listen to the use of the above. Out of the two, viz. natal 
Lagn and Hora Lagn, whichever is stronger, from there Varnad starts. If the natal Lagn is 
an odd RAsi, the counting of Dashas is clockwise, otherwise anticlockwise. Lagn Dasha 
years will equal the number of Rasis, intervening between the natal Lagn and Varnad. 
Similarly for other Bhavas. 


16-20. Effects of Varnad (cont.). Should a Kon from Lagn’s Varnad be occupied, or 
drishtied by a malefic, the native will live only up to the Dasha of the said Rasi. Just, as 
the Rudra Grah in Sool Dasha is capable of causing evils, the above-mentioned Grahas 
related to Varnad’s Kon be treated. The Varnad Lagn be considered, as natal Lagn, while 
the 7th from Varnad will denote the longevity of the spouse, the 11th longevity of elder 
brothers and sisters, the 3rd longevity of younger brothers and sisters, the 5th the 
longevity of sons, the 4th longevity of mother and the 9th longevity of father. The Dasha 
of the Sool Rasi will inflict greater evils. 


21-24. Effects of Varnad (cont.). Similar assessments be made with reference to the 
Varnad of each Bhava, commencing the first, and the evils and goods due to a nativity be 
known. These Varnad Dashas are only for Bhavas (RAsis) and not their occupants. The 
sub period of each Dasha will be one twelfth of the Dasha and the order will also be 
clockwise, or anti-clockwise, as explained earlier. The natal Lagn is to be calculated 
according to birth place, while Bhava Lagn, Hora Lagn etc. are common to all places. 


Ch. 6. The Sixteen Divisions of a Rasi 
1. O Maharishi Parasar, I have known from you about the Grahas, Rasis and their 


descriptions. I desire to know the details of various divisions of a Rasi, will you please 
narrate. 


2-4. Names of the 16 Vargas. Lord Brahma has described 16 kinds of Vargas (Divisions) 
for each Rasi. Listen to those. The names are Rasi, Hora, Dreshkan, Chaturthans, 
Saptans, Navans, Dashans, Dvadashans, Shodashans, Vimshans, Chaturvimshans, 
Saptavimshans, Trimshans, Khavedans, Akshavedans and Shashtians. 


5-6. Rasi and Hora. The Rasi, owned by a Grah, is called its Kshetra. The first half of an 
odd Rasi is the Hora, ruled by Strya. While the second half is the Hora of Candr. The 
reverse is true in the case of an even Rasi. Half of a Rasi is called Hora. These are totally 
24, counted from Mesh and repeated twice (at the rate of 12) in the whole of the zodiac. 


7-8. Dreshkan. One third of a R&si is called Dreshkan. These are totally 36, counted 
from Mesh, repeating thrice at the rate of 12 per round. The Ist, 5th and the 9th Rasis 
from a RAsi are its three Dreshkanas and are, respectively, lorded by Narada, Agasthya 
and Durvash. 


9. Chaturthans. The Lords of the 4 Kendras from a R&si are the rulers of respective 
Chaturthans of a Rasi, commencing from Mesh. Each Chaturthans is one fourth of a 
Rasi. The deities, respectively, are Sanak, Sanand, Kumar and Sanatan. 


10-11. Saptans. The Saptans (one seventh of a Rasi) counting commences from the same 
Rasi in the case of an odd RAsi. It is from the seventh Rasi thereof, while an even R4si is 
considered. The names of the seven divisions in odd Rasis are Kshaar Ksheer, Dadhi, 
Ghrith, Ikshu, Ras, Madhya and Suddh Jal. These designations are reversed for an even 
Rasi. 


12. Navans. The Navans calculation are for a Movable Rasi from there itself, for a Fixed 
Rasi from the 9th thereof and for a Dual Rasi from the Sth thereof. They go by 
designations Deva (divine), Manushya (human) and Rakshasa (devilish) in a successive 
and repetitive order for a Movable Rasi. (Manushya, Rakshasa and Deva are the order 
for a Fixed Rasi, while Rakshasa, Manushya and Deva are a Dual Rasi’s order) 


13-14. Dashans. Starting from the same Rasi for an odd Rasi and from the 9th with 
reference to an even Rasi, the 10 Dashansas, each of 3 degrees, are reckoned. These are 
presided over by the ten rulers of the cardinal directions, viz. Indra, Agni, Yama, 
Rakshasa, Varuna, Vayu, Kuber, Isan, Brahma and Ananth in case of an odd Rasi. It is in 
the reverse order, that these presiding deities are reckoned, when an even RA&si is given. 


15. Dvadashans. The reckoning of the Dvadashans (one twelfth of a Rasi, or 2’2 degrees 
each) commences from the same Rasi. In each R4si the presidentship repeats thrice in 
the order of Ganesh, Ashvini Kumar, Yama and Sarpa for the 12 Dvadashansas. 


16. Shodashans (or Kalans). Starting from Mesh for a Movable Rasi, from Simh for a 
Fixed Rasi and from Dhanu for a Dual Rasi, the 16 ShodashansSas (16th part of a Rasi, 
i.e. of 195230”) are regularly distributed. The presiding deities of these repeat in the 
order Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva and Surya four times in the case of an odd RaAsi. It is 
reverse in the case of an even RAsi, that these ruling deities are understood. 


17-21. Vimshans. From Mesh for a Movable Rasi, from Dhanu for a Fixed Rasi and 
from Simh for a Common RaAasi: this is how the calculations of Vimshansas (1/20th of a 
Rasi, or 1°30’ each) are to commence. The presiding deities of the 20 Vimshansas in an 
odd Rasi are, respectively: Kali, Gauri, Jaya, Lakshmi, Vijaya, Vimal, Sati, Tara, 
Jvalamukhi, Sveta, Lalita, Bagalamukhi, Pratyangir, Shachi, Raudri, Bhavani, Varad, 
Jaya, Tripura and Sumukhi. In an even R&asi these 20 deities, respectively, are Daya, 
Megha, Chinnasi, Pisachini, Dhumavathi, Matangi, Bal, Bhadr, Arun, Anal, Pingal, 
Chuchchuk, Ghora, Vaarahi, Vaishnavi, Sita, Bhuvanesvari, Bhairavi, Mangal and 
Aparajit. 


22-23. Chaturvimshans. The Chaturvimshans (1/24th part of a Rasi, or 1°15’ each) 
distribution commences from Simh and Kark, respectively, for an odd and an even Rasi. 
In the case of an odd RAsi the ruling deities repeat twice in the order of Skand, 
Parusdhar, Anal, Vishwakarma, Bhag, Mitr, Maya, Antaka, Vrisha-Dwaja, Govinda, 
Madan and Bhima. Reverse these from Bhima twice to know the deities for the 
Chaturvimshans in an even Ra&si. 


24-26. Saptavimshans (Nakshatrans, or Bhans). The Saptavimshans Lords are, 
respectively, the presiding deities of the 27 Nakshatras, as under: Dastra (Ashvini 
Kumar), Yama, Agni, Brahma, Candr, Isa, Adhiti, Jiva, Ahi, Pitar, Bhag, Aryama, Sirya, 
Tvasht, Marut, Chakragni, Mitr, Vasava, Rakshasa, Varuna, Vishwadeva, Govinda, Vasu, 
Varuna, Ajap, Ahirbuddhnya and Pushya. These are for an odd Rasis. Count these deities 
in a reverse order for an even Rasi. The Saptavimshans distribution commences from 
Mesh and other Movable Rasis for all the 12 Rasis. 


27-28. Trimshans. The Trimshans Lords for an odd Rasi are Mangal, Sani, Guru, Budh 
and Sukr. Each of them in order rules 5, 5, 8, 7 and 5 degrees. The deities, ruling over 
the Trimshansas, are, respectively, Agni, Vayu, Indra, Kuber and Varuna. In the case of 
an even Rasi the quantum of Trimshans, Grah lordship and deities get reversed. 


29-30. Khavedans (or Chatvarimshans, 1/40th part of a Rasi). For odd Rasis count from 
Mesh and for an even Rasi from Tula in respect of KhavedansSas (each of 45’ of arc). 
Vishnu, Candr, Marichi, Tvasht, Dhata, Shiva, Ravi, Yama, Yaksh, Gandharv, Kaal and 
Varuna repeat successively, as presiding deities, in the same order for all RAsis. 


31-32. Akshavedans (1/45th part of a Rasi). Mesh, Simh and Dhanu are the Rasis, from 


which the distributions, respectively, commence for Movable, Immovable and Common 
Rasis. In Movable Rasis Brahma, Shiva and Vishnu; in Immovable Rasis Shiva, Vishnu 
and Brahma and in Common Rasis Vishnu, Brahma and Shiva repeat 15 times the 
presidentship over these Akshavedansas. 


33-41. Shashtians (1/60th part of a Rasi, or half a degree each). To calculate the 
Shashtians Lord ignore the R4si position of a Grah and take the degrees etc. it traversed 
in that Rasi. Multiply that figure by 2 and divide the degrees by 12. Add 1 to the 
remainder, which will indicate the Rasi, in which the Shashtians falls. The Lord of that 
Rasi is the Grah, ruling the said Shashtians. In odd Rasis the names of Shashtiansas are 
1. Ghora, 2. Rakshasa, 3. Deva, 4. Kuber, 5. Yaksh, 6. Kindar, 7. Bhrasht, 8. Kulaghna, 
9. Garal, 10. Vahni, 11. Maya, 12. Purishak, 13. Apampathi, 14. Marutwan, 15. Kaal, 16. 
Sarpa, 17. Amrit, 18. Indu, 19. Mridu, 20. Komal, 21. Heramba, 22. Brahma, 23. Vishnu, 
24. Maheshwara, 25. Deva, 26. Ardr, 27. Kalinas, 28. Kshitees, 29. Kamalakar, 30. 
Gulik, 31. Mrityu, 32. Kaal, 33. Davagni, 34. Ghora, 35. Yama, 36 Kantak, 37. Suddh, 
38. Amrit, 39. PurnaCandr, 40. Vishadagdha, 41. Kulanas, 42. Vamshakshaya, 43. Utpat, 
44. Kaal, 45. Saumya, 46. Komal, 47. Sheetal, 48. 


Karaladamshtr, 49. Candramukhi, 50. Praveen, 51. Kaalpavak, 52. Dhannayudh, 53. 
Nirmal, 54. Saumya, 55. Krur, 56. Atisheetal, 57. Amrit, 58. Payodhi, 59. Brahman, 60. 
CandraRekha (InduRekha). The reverse is the order for even R&Sis in so much, as these 
names are cased. Grahas in benefic Shashtiansas produce auspicious, while the opposite 
is true in case of Grahas in malefic Shashtiansas. 


42-53. Varg Classification. Maitreya, explained now are the sum effects of 
classifications of different divisions (or Vargas, so far narrated). These are four kinds, 
viz. Shad Varg, Sapth Varg, Dasha Varg and Shodasha Varg. In the Shad Varg 
classification the Varg designations are Kimshuk, Vyanjan, Chamar, Chatr and Kundal, 
according to a Grah being in 2 to 6 combinations of good Vargas. Next is the Sapth Varg, 
in which these classifications continue in the same manner up to six combinations of 
good Vargas, the 7th additional Varg getting classified, as Mukut. In the Dasha Varg 
scheme the designations commence from Parijata etc., such as 2 good Vargas - Parijatha, 
3 Uttama, 4 Gopur, 5 Simhasan, 6 Paravata, 7 Devaloka, 8 Brahmaloka, 9 Sakravahana 
and 10 Vargas - Shridham. In the Shodasha Varg scheme the combinations of Vargas go 
with designations thus: two good Vargas - Bhedak, 3 Kusum, 4 Nagapushpa, 5 Kanduk, 
6 Kerala, 7 Kalpa Vriksha, 8 Chandan Vana, 9 PurnaCandr, 10 Uchchaisrava, 11 
Dhanvantari, 12 Suryakant, 13 Vidrum, 14 Chakra-Simhasan, 15 Golok and 16 Vargas - 
Sri Vallabh. In these divisions the divisions, falling in the Grah’s exaltation Rasi, 
Mooltrikon Rasi, own R&asi and the Rasis, owned by the Lord of a Kendra from the 
Arudha Lagn, are all to be considered (as good Vargas). The divisions of a combust 
Grah, defeated Grah, weak Grah and a Grah in bad Avasthas, like Sayan, be all ignored 
to be auspicious, for these destroy the good Yogas. 


Ch. 7. Divisional Considerations 


1-8. Use of the 16 Divisions. Now I will explain the use of these sixteen divisions. The 
physique from Lagn, wealth from Hora, happiness through co-born from Dreshkan, 
fortunes from Chaturthans, sons and grandsons from Saptans, spouse from Navans, 
power (and position) from Dashans, parents from Dvadashans, benefits and adversities 
through conveyances from Shodashans, worship from Vimshans, learning from 
Chaturvimshans, strength and weakness from Saptavimshans, evil effects from 
Trimshans, auspicious and inauspicious effects from Khavedans and all indications from 
both Akshavedans and Shashtians: these are the considerations to be made through the 
respective Vargas. The Bhava, whose Lord is in a malefic Shashtians, will diminish; so 
say Garga and others. The Bhava, whose Lord is in a benefic Shodashans, flourish. This 
is how the 16 Vargas are to be evaluated. 


9-12. After assessing the 20 point strength of the ascending degree, of other Bhavas and 
of the Grahas, the good and bad effects be declared. I explain below the method of 
knowing the Vimsopak strength (20 point strength), just by knowing which an idea of 
the results of actions of this birth and of former birth will clearly emerge. The Grahas 
from Strya on get full strength, when in exaltation, or in own RAsi and are bereft of 
strength, when in the 7th (from exaltation). In between the strength be known by the rule 
of three process. In the case of a Grah, owning two RaAsis, distinction of placement in 
odd/even R&si identical with own Rasi be made. 


13-16. Hora, Dreshkan and Trimshans Effects. Guru, Siirya and Mangal give 
(pronounced) effects in the Hora of Sirya. Candr, Sukr and Sani do so, when in Candr’s 
Horas; Budh is effective in both the Horas. In the case of an even Rasi the Hora of Candr 
will be powerful in 


effects, while Stirya’s Hora in an odd R&si will be so. Full, medium and nil will be the 
effects, respectively, in the beginning middle and the end of a Hora. Similar applications 
be made for a Dreshkan, Turyans, Navans etc. As for Trimshans effects, Stirya is akin to 
Mangal and Candr is akin to Sukr. The effects, applicable to Rasi, will apply to 
Trimshans. 


17-19. Vimshopak Bal. The Shad Vargas consist of Rasi, Hora, Dreshkan, Navans, 
Dvadashans and Trimshans. The full Bal for each of the divisions, respectively, are 6, 2, 
4,5, 2 and 1. This is the Vimshopak Bal, relating to Shad Varg division. Adding the 
Saptans to the Shad Vargas, we get Sapt Varg, the Vimshopak Bal for which is 5, 2, 3, 
2'4, 4'4, 2 and 1. These are gross strengths, while subtle ones should be understood by 
exact positions. 


20. Add Dashans, Shodashans and Shashtians to the said Sapt Varg Divisions to get the 
scheme of Dasha Varg. The Vimshopak Bal in this context is 3 for Rasi, 5 for Shashtians 
and for the other 8 divisions 1’ each. 


21-25. When the 16 divisions (Shodash Varg Scheme) are considered together, the 
Vimshopak score goes thus: Hora 1, Trimsans 1, Dreshkan 1, Shodashans 2, Navans 3, 
Rasi 3’4, Shashtians 4 and the rest of the nine divisions each a half. The Vimshopak Bal 
remains as 20, only when the Grah is in own Bhava Vargas. Otherwise, the total strength 
from 20 declines to 18 in Pramudit Vargas, to 15 in Shant Vargas, to 10 in Svasth 
divisions, to 7 in Duhkhit Vargas and to 5 in Khal Vargas. (These figures are called Varg 
Vishwa) 


26-27. Vimshopak Proportional Evaluation. Multiply the figure due to full strength for 
the division by the Varg Vishwa and divide by 20 to get the exact strength of the Grah. If 
the total is below 5, the Grah will not be capable of giving auspicious results. If it is 
above 5, but below 10, the Grah will yield some good effects. Later on up to 15 it is 
indicative of mediocre effect. A Grah with above 15 will yield wholly favourable effects. 


28-29. Other Sources of Strength. Maitreya, there are other kinds of sources, as I explain 
below. Grahas in the 7th from Surya will be fully effective. One with an identical 
longitude in comparison to Strya’s will destroy the good effects. Rule of three process 
be applied to the Grah in between these positions. 


30-32. Dasha effects with Vimshopak Bal. Maitreya, after assessing the Vimshopak Bal 
through the various divisions, the rising and setting of the Grahas be considered. The 
Vimshopak Bal is classified under Purna, AtiPurna, Madhya, AtiMadhya, Heen, 
AtiHeen, Swalpa and AtiSwalp. Thus should be classified the Vimshopak Bal and the 
Dasha period results declared accordingly. 


33-36. Kendras, Konas etc. defined. O Maitreya, listen to other matters, which I am 
explaining. The Kendras are specially known, as Lagn (the ascendent), Bandhu Bhava, 
Yuvati Bhava (the descendant) and Karm Bhava (mid-heaven). Dhan, Putr, Randhr and 
Labh Bhava are Panapharas (succedents), while Sahaj, Ari, Dharm and Vyaya Bhava are 
called Apoklimas (cadents). Putr and Dharm Bhava are known by the name Kon (or 
trine). Evil Bhavas, or Dusthan Bhavas are Ari, Randhr and Vyaya Bhava. Chaturasras 
are Bandhu and Randhr Bhava. Sahaj, Ari, Karm and Labh Bhava are Upachaya Bhavas. 


37-38. Names of Bhavas. Thanu, Dhan, Sahaj, Bandhu, Putr, Ari, Yuvati, Randhr, 
Dharm, Karma, Labh and Vyaya are in order the names of Bhavas. I explained these 


briefly and leave 


it to you to grasp more, according to your intelligence. As delivered by Lord Brahma, 


some further information is added thus (i.e. in the following verses). 


39-43. Indications from Bhavas. Dharm Bhava and the 9th from Strya deal with one’s 
father. Whatever effects are to be known from the Karm and Labh Bhava, be also known 
from similar Bhavas, counted from Strya. Whatever results are to be known from 
Bandhu, Tanu, Dhan, Labh and Dharm should also be known from the 4th of Candr, 
from Kark Rasi itself and from the 2nd, 11th and 9th from Candr, respectively. Whatever 
has to be known through Sahaj Bhava, be also analyzed through the 3rd from Mangal. 
The 6th from Budh be also considered in regard to indications, derivable from Ari 
Bhava. The 5th from Guru, the 7th from Sukr and both the 8th and 12th from Sani stand 
for consideration, respectively, in respect of offspring, spouse and death. The Lord of the 
Bhava is equally important, when estimating the indications of a particular Bhava. 


Ch. 8. Drishtis of the Rasis 


1-3. Rasi Drishtis. O Maitreya, now detailed are the Drishtis, emanating from the Rasi 
Mesh etc. Every Movable RAsi drishties the 3 Fixed Rasis, leaving the Fixed Rasi 
adjacent to it. Every Fixed Rasi gives Drishti to the 3 Movable RAsis, barring the 
adjacent Movable Rasi. And a Common Rasi gives a Drishti to the other three Common 
Rasis. The Grah in a Rasi gives the same Drishti, as the Rasi (in which the Grah is) does. 


4-5. Dristhis of the Grahas. A Grah in a Movable R&si gives a Drishti to the other 3 
Fixed Rasis, leaving the Fixed R4si next to it. A Grah in a Fixed Rasi does not give a 
Drishti to the next Movable RAsi, but the remaining 3 Movable RAsis. The one in a 
Common Rasi gives a Drishti to the remaining 3 Common Rasis. Simultaneously a Grah 
in the Rasi, that receives a Drishti, is also subjected to the Drishti concerned. 


6-9. Diagram of Dristhis. As depicted by Lord Brahma, I now narrate the diagram of 
Drishtis, so that Drishtis are easily understood by a mere sight of the diagram. Draw a 
square, or a circle marking the 8 directions (4 corners and 4 quarters thereof). Mark the 
zodiacal Rasis, as under: Mesh and Vrishabh in East, Mithun in the North-East, Kark 
and Simh in the North, Kanya in the North-West, Tula and Vrischik in the West, Dhanu 
in the South-West, Makar and Kumbh in the South and Meen in the South-East. 


Addition Santhanam till Ch. 9. The Drishtis (as per the earlier Slokas) can be shown in a 
square diagram, or circular diagram (as per convenience). 


Ch. 9. Evils at Birth 


1. O Brahmin, first of all estimate the evils and checking factors thereof through Lagn 
and then declare the effects of the 12 Bhavas. 


2. Evils, causing premature end, exist up to the 24th year of one’s age. As such, no 
definite calculation of life span should be made till such year of age. 


3-6. Short-life Combinations (up to Sloka 23). Should Candr be in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya 
Bhava and receives a Drishti from a malefic, the child will die soon. If in the process 
there be a Drishti from a benefic, it may live up to 8. Ifa benefic is retrograde in Ari, 
Randhr, or 


Vyaya Bhava, receiving a Drishti from a malefic, death will occur within a month of 
birth. This is true, only when Lagn is not occupied by a benefic. Should Putr Bhava be 
occupied by Sani, Mangal and Sirya jointly, (early) death of mother and brother will 
come to pass. Mangal, placed in Tanu, or in Randhr Bhava and be yuti with Sani, or 
Surya, or receiving a Drishti from a malefic, being bereft of a Drishti from a benefic, 
will prove a source of (immediate) death. 


7-11. If Sani and Mangal give a Drishti to Lagn, as the luminaries are yuti with Rahu 
(elsewhere), the child will live a fortnight. Immediate death of the child along with its 
mother will occur, if Sani is in Karm Bhava, Candr in Ari Bhava and Mangal in Yuvati 
Bhava. One will immediately go to the abode of Yama, if Sani is in Tanu Bhava, while 
Candr and Guru are in their order in Randhr and Sahaj Bhava. Only a month will be the 
span of one’s life, who had Strya in Dharm Bhava, Mangal in Yuvati Bhava and Guru 
and Sukr in Labh Bhava. All Grahas (any Grah) in Vyaya Bhava will be the source of a 
short life, specifically the luminaries, Sukr and Rahu. But the Drishti of these four 
Grahas (on Vyaya Bhava) will counteract such evils. 


12. Candr is capable of causing early end, if she is with a malefic in Yuvati, Randhr, or 
Tanu Bhava and unrelated to a benefic. 


13. Early death will come to pass, if there be a birth in the morning, or evening 
junctions, or in a Hora, ruled by Candr, or in Gandanta, while Candr and malefics 
occupy Kendras from Lagn. 


14. Definition of Sandhya. 3 Ghatis before the sight of the semi disc (half) of the rising 
Surya and a similar duration, following Surya’s set, are called, as morning twilight and 
evening twilight, respectively. 


15. Early Death. Should all the malefics be in the oriental half, while benefics are in the 
occidental half, early death of one born in Vrischik, will follow. In this case there is no 
need of any rethinking. 


16. Malefic in Vyaya and Ari Bhava, or in Randhr and Dhan Bhava, while Lagn is 
hemmed between other malefics, will bring early death. 


17. Malefics, occupying Tanu and Yuvati Bhava, while Candr is yuti with a malefic with 
no relief from a benefic, will also cause premature death. 


18. Early death will be inflicted on the native, if decreasing Candr is in Tanu Bhava, 
while malefics capture Randhr Bhava and a Kendra. There is no doubt about that. 


19. Candr in Tanu, Randhr, Vyaya, or Yuvati Bhava and hemmed between malefics will 
confer premature death. 


20. Should Candr be in Tanu Bhava, hemmed between malefics, while Yuvati, or Randhr 
Bhava has a malefic in it, he will face immediate death along with his mother. 


21. Should Sani, Siirya and Mangal be in Vyaya, Dharm and Randhr Bhava without 
Drishti from a benefic, the child will face instant death. 


22. With a malefic in Yuvati Bhava, or in the rising Dreshkan, while decreasing Candr is 
in Tanu Bhava, death be experienced early. 


23. The life span of the child will be either 2 months, or 6 months only, if all Grahas 
devoid of strength are relegated to Apoklima Bhavas. 


24. Evils to Mother (up to Sloka 33). The mother of the native will incur evils (will die 
soon), if Candr at birth receives a Drishti from three malefics. Benefics, giving a Drishti 
to Candr, will bring good to the mother. 


25. Should Dhan Bhava be occupied by Rahu, Budh, Sukr, Siirya and Sani, the child’s 
birth has been after its father’s death, while even the mother will face early death. 


26. If Candr is in the 7th, or the 8th from a malefic, be herself with a malefic and 
receives a Drishti from a strong malefic, predict mothers end to be early. 


27. The child will not live on mother’s milk, but on that of she-goat, if Stirya is exalted, 
or debilitated in Yuvati Bhava. 


28. Should a malefic be in the 4th, identical with an inimical Rasi, counted from Candr, 
while there is no benefic in a Kendra, the child will lose its mother in a premature 
manner. 


29. Malefics in Ari and Vyaya Bhava will bring evils to mother. The child’s father will 
receive similar effects, if Bandhu and Karm Bhava are captured by malefics. 


30. Budh in Dhan Bhava, while malefics occupy Tanu and Vyaya Bhava: this Yoga will 
destroy the entire family. 


31. Guru, Sani and Rahu, respectively, posited in Tanu, Dhan and Sahaj Bhava will 
cause mother’s death early. 


32. Doubtlessly the mother will give up the child, if it has malefics in Konas, counted 
from the decreasing Candr. No benefic shall be yuti with the said malefics. 


33. If Mangal and Sani are together in a Kendra with reference to Candr and occupy one 
and the same Navans, the child will have two mothers. Yet it will be short-lived. 


34. Evil to Father (up to Sloka 42). One’s father will incur early death, if Sani, Mangal 
and Candr in their orders are in Tanu, Yuvati and Ari Bhava. 


35. The native will at the time of his marriage lose his father, if Guru is in Tanu Bhava, 
while Sani, Stirya, Mangal and Budh are together in Dhan Bhava. 


36. Early loss of father will take place, if Strya is with a malefic, or is hemmed between 
malefics, as there is another malefic in the 7th from Surya. 


37. Remote will be the possibility of one’s father sustaining, if Siirya is in Yuvati, while 
Mangal is in Karm and Rahu is in Vyaya Bhava. 


38. Early and troubled will be one’s father’s death, if Mangal is in Karm Bhava identical 
with his enemy’s Rasi. 
39. Candr in Ari Bhava, Sani in Tanu Bhava and Mangal in Yuvati Bhava: this array of 


heavenly bodies at birth will not ensure a long span of life for the father. 


40. If Siirya receives a Drishti from Sani and be in Mesh, or in Vrischik Navans, the 
father would have given up the family before birth of the child, or would have passed 
away. 


41. If Bandhu, Karm and Vyaya Bhava are all occupied by malefics, both the parents 
will leave the child to its own fate and wander from place to place. 


42. The father will not see the native till his (the native’s) 23rd year, if Rahu and Guru 
are together in an inimical Rasi identical with Tanu, or Bandhu Bhava. 


43-45. Parents. Surya is the indicator of father for all beings, while the mother is 
indicated by Candr. Should Siirya receive a Drishti from one, or more malefics, or be 


hemmed between them, this will cause evils to father. Similarly Candr be considered in 
respect of mother. Malefics in the 6th, the 8th, or the 4th from Surya will bring 
inauspicious results about the father. Malefics in such places from Candr will be adverse 
for the mother. The strength, or otherwise of the occupants concerned be suitably 
estimated. 


Ch. 10. Antidotes for Evils 


1. Those are the evils (due to a native). I now narrate the antidotes for such evils as well, 
which will be helpful to assess the extent of inauspiciousness. 


2. Should one among Budh, Guru and Sukr be in an angle from Lagn, all evils are 
destroyed, as Surya eliminates darkness. 


3. Just as a single reverential obeisance before Lord Shiva, the Trident holder frees one 
from all sins, a single, but strong Guru in Lagn will ward off all the evils. 


4. Lagn Lord is singly capable of counteracting all evils, if he is strongly placed in an 
angle, just as Lord Shiva, the holder of the Bow destroyed the three cities, built of gold, 
silver and iron for the demons by Maya. 


5. All evils are destroyed, if a benefic drishties Lagn of one born during the night in the 
bright half. Similarly a malefic’s Drishti on Lagn of one born during day time in the dark 
half. 


6. Surya in Vyaya will confer a hundred-year life span on one born in Tul Lagn. 


7. It will prove auspicious for the mother as well as the native, if Mangal joins, or is 
drishtied by Guru. 


8. If malefics are surrounded by benefics, while angles, or trines are themselves benefic- 
occupied, evils disappear soon. Not only this, evils will not follow from the Bhavas 
concerned. 


Ch. 11. Judgement of Bhavas 


1. O Maharishi Parashar, I have come to know of the evils and antidotes thereof from 
you. Please tell me, what is to be deduced from each Bhava. 


2. Indications of Tanu Bhava. Maharishi Parashar replies. Physique, appearance, intellect 
(or the organ of intelligence, i.e. brain), complexion of the body, vigour, weakness, 
happiness, grief and innate nature are all to be guessed through the ascending Rasi. 


3. Indications of Dhan Bhava. Wealth, grains (food etc.), family, death, enemies, metals, 
precious stones etc. are to be understood through Dhan Bhava. 


4. Indications of Sahaj Bhava. From Sahaj Bhava know of the following: valour, 
servants (attending etc.), brothers, sisters etc., initiatory instructions (Upadesh), journey 
and parent’s death. 


5. Indications of Bandhu Bhava. Conveyances, relatives, mother, happiness, treasure, 
lands and buildings are to be consulted through Bandhu Bhava. 


6. Indications of Putr Bhava. The learned should deduce from Putr Bhava amulets, 
sacred spells, learning, knowledge, sons, royalty (or authority), fall of position etc. 


7. Indications of Ari Bhava. Maternal uncle, doubts about death, enemies, ulcers, step- 
mother etc. are to be estimated from Ari Bhava. 


8. Indications of Yuvati Bhava. Wife, travel, trade, loss of sight, death etc. be known 
from Yuvati Bhava. 


9. Indications of Randhr Bhava. Randhr Bhava indicates longevity, battle, enemies, 
forts, wealth of the dead and things, that have happened and are to happen (in the past 
and future births). 


10. Indications of Dharm Bhava. Fortunes, wife’s brother, religion, brother’s wife, visits 
to shrines etc. be known from Dharm Bhava. 


11. Indications of Karm Bhava. Royalty (authority), place, profession (livelihood), 
honour, father, living in foreign lands and debts are to be understood from Karm Bhava. 


12. Indications of Labh Bhava. All articles, son’s wife, income, prosperity, quadrupeds 
etc. are to be understood from Labh Bhava. 


13. Indications of Vyaya Bhava. From Vyaya Bhava, one can know about expenses, 
history of enemies, one’s own death etc. 


14-16. Prosperity, or Annihilation of a Bhava. Predict prosperity of the Bhava, which is 
yuti with, or drishtied by a benefic. Also, when its Lord is in Yuvavastha, or 
Prabuddhavastha, or in Kismaravastha, or in Karm Bhava, the Bhavas well-being is 
indicated. The Bhava, which is not drishtied by its Lord, or, whose Lord is with a 
malefic Grah, or with one of the Lords of evil and such other Bhavas (i.e. 3rd, 6th, 8th, 
11th and 12th), or is defeated in a war between Grahas, or is in one of the three 


Avasthas, viz, Vriddhavastha, Mritavastha and Suptavastha. 
Ch. 12. Effects of Tanu Bhava 


1-2. Physical comforts. Should Lagn Lord be yuti with a malefic, or be in Randhr, 6th, 
or 12th, physical felicity will diminish. If he is in an angle, or trine there will be at all 
times comforts of the body. If Lagn Lord is in debilitation, combustion, or enemy’s R4si, 
there will be diseases. With a benefic in an angle, or trine all diseases will disappear. 
Lagn’s angles (i.e. Bandhu, Yuvati, or the 10th), or its trine (Putr, Dharm), containing a 
benefic, is a powerful remedy for all, related to health. 


3. There will not be bodily health, if Lagn, or Candr be drishtied by, or yuti with a 
malefic, being devoid of a benefics Drishti. 


4. Bodily Beauty. A benefic in Lagn will give a pleasing appearance, while a malefic 
will make one bereft of good appearance. Felicity of the body will be enjoyed, if Lagn is 
drishtied by, or yuti with a benefic. 


5-7. Other Benefits. If Lagn Lord, Budh, Guru, or Sukr be in an angle, or in a trine, the 
native will be long lived, wealthy, intelligent and liked by the king. Fame, wealth, 
abundant pleasures and comforts of the body will be acquired, if Lagn Lord is ina 
Movable R&si and be drishtied by a benefic Grah. One will be endowed with royal 
marks (of fortune), if Budh, Guru, or Sukr be in Lagn along with the Candr, or be in 
angle from Lagn. If Budh, Guru, or Sukr be in 4th, 7th, or 10th from Lagn, or be in the 
company of Candr in Lagn, the native will enjoy royal fortunes. 


8. Coiled Birth. If there be a birth in one of Mesh, Vrishabh and Simh Lagnas, 
containing either Sani, or Mangal, the birth of the child is with a coil around a limb. The 
corresponding limb will be in accordance with the Rasi, or Navans, rising. 


9. Birth of Twins. The native, who has Surya in a quadruped RAasi, while others are in 
Dual Rasis with strength, is born, as one of the twins. 


10. To Be Nurtured by Three Mothers. If Stirya and Candr join in one and the same 
Bhava and fall in one Navans, the native will be nurtured by three different mothers for 
the first three months from its birth and will later on be brought up by its father and 
brother. (‘Bhratri’ apart from meaning a brother calls for interpretation, as a near relative 
in general) 


11. Important. The learned in Jyotish should base the effects on Candr also, as are 
applicable to Lagn. Now explained are clues to know of ulcers, identity marks etc. on 
one’s person. 


12-14. Decanates and Bodily Limbs. Head, eyes, ears, nose, temple, chin and face is the 
order of limbs, denoted (by the various Bhavas), when the first decanate of a Rasi 
ascends. In the case of the second decanate ascending the order is neck, shoulder, arm, 
side, heart, stomach and navel. The order for the third decanate ascending is pelvis, 
anus/penis, testicles, thigh, knee, calf and foot. The portion already risen indicates left 
side of the body (while the one yet to rise, i.e. the invisible half, denotes the right side of 
the body). 


15. Limbs Affected. The limb, related to a malefic by occupation, will have ulcers, or 
scars, while the one, related to a benefic, will have a mark (like moles etc). So say the 
Jyotishis. (Also see Sloka 6, Ch. 4 of Saravali, which states, that a malefic, or a benefic, 
if be in own 


Rasi, or Navans, the effects will be right from birth. In other cases it will be in the 
course of one’s life, that these effects will come to pass) 


Ch. 13. Effects of Dhan Bhava 


1-2. Combinations for Wealth. O excellent of the Brahmins, listen to me, speaking on 
the effects of Dhan Bhava. If the Lord of Dhan is in Dhan, or is in an angle, or in trine, 
he will promote one’s wealth (or monetary state). Should he be in Ari/8th/12th, financial 
conditions will decline. A benefic in Dhan will give wealth, while a malefic instead will 
destroy wealth. 


3. One will be wealthy, if Guru is in Dhan, as the Lord of Dhan, or is with Mangal. 


4. If Dhan Lord is in Labh, while the Lord of Labh in Dhan, wealth will be acquired by 
the native. Alternately these two Lords may join in an angle, or in a trine. 


5. If the Lord of Dhan is in an angle, while Labh Lord is in a trine thereof, or is drishtied 
by, or yuti with Guru and Sukr, the subject will be wealthy. 


6-7. Yogas for Poverty. One will be penniless, if the Lord of Dhan Bhava is in an evil 
Bhava, while the Lord of Labh Bhava is also so placed and Dhan Bhava is occupied by a 
malefic. There will be penury right from birth and the native will have to beg even for 
his food, if the Lords of Dhan and Labh Bhava are both combust, or with malefics. 


8. Loss of Wealth through the King. Should the Lords of Dhan and Labh Bhava be 
relegated to Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, while Mangal is in Labh Bhava and Rahu is in 
Dhan Bhava, the native will lose his wealth on account of royal punishments. 


9. Expenses on Good Accounts. When Guru is in Labh, Sukr is in Dhan and a benefic is 
placed in Vyaya Bhava, while Dhan’s Lord is yuti with a benefic, there will be expenses 
on religious, or charitable grounds. 


10. Fame etc. If Dhan’s Lord is in own RAsi, or is exalted, the native will look after his 
people, will help others and also will become famous. 


11. Effortless Aquisition. If Dhan’s Lord is yuti with a benefic and is in a good division, 
like Paravatans, there will be effortlessly all kinds of wealth in the native’s family. 
(‘“Paravatansdau” of the text denotes Paravat, or such other higher Vargas: Dhan’s Lord 
should be in Paravatans, or in Devalokans, Brahmalokans, Sakravahanans, or 
Sridhamans in the Dash Varg scheme) 


12. Eyes. If Dhan Lord is endowed with strength, the native will possess beautiful eyes. 
Should the said Grah be in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, there will be disease, or 
deformity of eyes. 


13. Untruthful Person. If Dhan Bhava and its Lord are yuti with malefics, the native will 
be a talebearer, will speak untruth and will be afflicted by windy diseases. 


Ch. 14. Effects of Sahaj Bhava 


1. O Brahmin, I now tell you about Sahaj Bhava. Should Sahaj Bhava be yuti with, or 
drishtied by a benefic, the native will be endowed with co-born and be courageous. 


2. If Sahaj’s Lord along with Mangal drishties Sahaj Bhava, the native will enjoy good 
results, due to Sahaj Bhava. Alternatively these two Grahas may be in Sahaj itself. 


3. Destruction at once of co-born will come to pass, if the said 2 Grahas are together 
with a malefic, or in a Rasi, owned by a malefic. 


4-4'4. Female and Male Co-born. If Sahaj’s Lord is a female Grah, or, if Sahaj Bhava be 
occupied by female Grahas, one will have sisters, born after him. Similarly male Grahas 
and male Rasis denote younger brothers. Should it be of mixed nature, co-born of both 
sexes will be obtained. These effects be declared after assessing the strength and 
weakness of the concerned. 


5-6. Should Sahaj’s Lord and Mangal be together in Randhr Bhava, destruction of co- 
born will result. Happiness in this respect will come to pass, if Mangal, or Sahaj’s Lord 


is in an angle, or in a trine, or in exaltation, or friendly divisions. 


7-11. Number of Brothers and Sisters. If Budh is in Sahaj Bhava, while Sahaj’s Lord and 


Candr are together, as the indicator (Mangal) joins Sani, the effects are: there occurred 
the birth of an elder sister and there will be younger brothers. Furthermore, the third 
brother will die. Should Mangal be yuti with Rahu, while Sahaj’s Lord is in his 
debilitation Rasi, there will be loss of younger brothers and/or sisters, while three elder 
brothers and/or sisters were attained by the native. If Sahaj’s Lord is in an angle, while 
the significator (Mangal) is exalted in a trine and be yuti with Guru, 12 will be the 
number of total co-born. Out of these two elders and the 3rd, the 7th, the 9th and the 
12th of the younger co-born will be shortlived, while six of the said twelve will be 
longlived. 


12-13. There will be 1 co-born, if Vyaya’s Lord (some texts read, as Labh’s Lord) joins 
Mangal and Guru, while Sahaj Bhava is occupied by Candr. If Candr is lonely placed in 
Sahaj Bhava with Drishti of male Grahas, there will be younger brothers, while the 
Drishti of Sukr denotes younger sisters. 


14. Adverse Grahas. Surya in Sahaj Bhava will destroy the preborn. The afterborn will 
be destroyed, if Sani is found in Sahaj Bhava. In the same situation Mangal will destroy 
both the preborn and later-born. 


15. After estimating the strength and weakness of such Yogas, the effects, related to 
brothers and sisters, be announced. 


Ch. 15. Effects of Bandhu Bhava 


1. O excellent of the Brahmins, thus have been briefly told the effects of Sahaj Bhava. 
Now listen to the results, related to Bandhu Bhava. 


2. Housing Comforts. One will have residential comforts in full degree, if Bandhu is 
occupied by its Lord, or by Lagn’s Lord and be drishtied by a benefic. 


3. Miscellaneous. Should Putr’s Lord be in his own Bhava, or in own Navans, or in 
exaltation, the native will be endowed with comforts, related to lands, conveyances, 
houses etc. and musical instruments. 


4. Housing Comforts. If Karm’s Lord joins Bandhu’s Lord in an angle, or in a trine, the 
native will acquire beautiful mansions. 


5. Relatives. Should Budh be in Lagn, while Bandhu’s Lord, being a benefic, is drishtied 
by another benefic, the native will be honoured by his relatives. 


6. Long-living Mother. If Bandhu Bhava is occupied by a benefic, while its Lord is in 
his exaltation R4si, as the indicator of mother is endowed with strength, the native will 


have a long-living mother. 


7. Happiness of Mother. The native’s mother will be happy, if Bandhu’s Lord is in an 
angle, while Sukr is also in an angle, as Budh is exalted. 


8. Quadrupeds. Siirya in Bandhu, Candr and Sani in Dharm and Mangal in Labh Bhava; 
this Yoga will confer cows and buffaloes on the native. 


9. Dumbness. Should Bandhu Bhava be a Movable one, while its Lord and Mangal are 
together in Ari, or Randhr Bhava, the native will be dumb. 


10-14. Conveyances. If Lagn’s Lord is a benefic, while Bandhu’s Lord 1s in fall, or in 
Labh Bhava and the significator (Sukr) is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will obtain 
conveyances in his 12th year. Should Siirya be in Bandhu Bhava, as Bandhu’s Lord is 
exalted and be with Sukr, one will acquire conveyances in his 32nd year. It will be in the 
42nd year, that one will be endowed with conveyances, if Bandhu’s Lord joins Karm’s 
Lord in his (4th Lord’s) exaltation Navans. An exchange between Labh’s and Bandhu’s 
Lords will confer conveyances in the 12th year. A benefic, related to Bandhu Bhava (and 
to its Lord), will bring with him auspicious effects (regarding conveyances), while a 
malefic will produce only malefic effects (in respect of conveyances). Should a benefic 
be in Bandhu, drishti Bandhu, or in yuti with the Lord of Bandhu, or a Drishti on the 
Lord of Bandhu Bhava, then the native will be happy with conveyances and be free from 
accidents and dangers. A malefic, replacing the said benefic, will cause losses, 
concerning vehicles and reduce one to severe accidents. 


Ch. 16. Effects of Putr Bhava 


1-3. O Brahmin, now I tell you the effects, related to Putr Bhava. If the Lords of Lagn 
and Putr are in their own RAsis, or in an angle, or in a trine, one will enjoy thorough 
happiness through his children. Should Putr’s Lord be in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, 
there will be no offspring. Should the Lord of Putr be combust, or be with malefics and 
be weak, there will be no children; even, if per chance issues are obtained, they will only 
quit the world soon. The Yuti of Putr’s Lord with Lagn’s Lord in a good Bhava will 
ensure early obtainment of children apart from happiness through them. If they join in 
an evil Bhava, they will prove a defect in this respect. 


4. If Putr’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, as Lagn’s Lord 1s yuti with Mangal, the native will lose 
his very first child, whereafter his female will not be fertile to yield an offspring. 


5. Should Putr’s Lord be in fall in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, while Budh and Ketu 
are in Putr Bhava, the native’s wife will give birth to one child only. 


6. If Putr’s Lord is in fall and be not in Drishti to Putr, while Sani and Budh are in Putr, 
the native’s wife will give birth to one child only. 


7. Should Dharm’s Lord be in Lagn, while Putr’s Lord is in fall and Ketu is in Putr along 
with Budh, obtainment of progeny will be after a great deal of ordeal. 


8. If Putr’s Lord is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, or be in an inimical Rasi, or be in 
fall, or in Putr itself, the native will beget issues with difficulty. 


9. Should Putr Bhava be owned by Sani, or Budh and be occupied, or drishtied by Sani 
and Mandi, one will have adopted issues. 


10. Should Surya and Candr be together in a Rasi and in the same Navans, the native 
will be brought up by three mothers, or two fathers. 


11. Adopted issue is indicated, if Putr is tenanted by six Grahas, while its Lord is in 
Vyaya Bhava and Candr and Lagn are endowed with strength. 


12. There will be many children, if Putr’s Lord is strong, while Putr is drishtied by 
strong Budh, Guru and Sukr. 


13. If Putr’s Lord is with Candr, or is in her Decanate, the native will beget daughters; so 
say Jyotishis. 


14. If Putr’s Lord is in a Movable Rasi, while Sani is in Putr, as Rahu is with Candr, the 
child (so born) is of questionable birth. 


15. Undoubtedly the native is born of other’s loins, if Candr is in the 8th from Lagn, 
while Guru is in the 8th from Candr. Malefic’s Drishti, or Yuti is essential in this Yog. 


16. If Putr’s Lord is exalted, or be in Dhan, Putr, or Dharm Bhava, or be yuti with, or 
drishtied by Guru, obtainment of children will be there. 


17. One will obtain children, that will indulge in mean deeds, if Putr is occupied by 
three, or four malefics, while Putr’s Lord is in fall. A benefic (including Budh) in Putr is 
excluded in the said combination. 


18. If Putr is occupied by Guru, while its Lord is with Sukr, one will obtain an offspring 
in his 32nd, or 33rd year. 


19. Should Putr’s Lord be in an angle along with Guru, the Karak, one will beget a child 
at the age of 30, or 36. 


20. If Guru is in Dharm Bhava, while Sukr is in the 9th from Guru along with Lagn’s 
Lord, one will beget a child at the age of 40. 


21. The native will at the age of 32 lose his child, if Rahu is in Putr, Putr’s Lord is in 
Yuti with a malefic and Guru is in debilitation. 


22. There will be loss of children at 33 and 36, if a malefic is in the 5th from Guru, 
while another is in the Sth from Lagn. 


23. Should Mandi be in Lagn, while Lagn’s Lord is in fall, grief on account of loss of 
child at the age of 56 will come to pass. 


24-32. Number of Children. There will be 10 sons, if Bandhu Bhava and Ari Bhava are 
occupied by malefics, while Putr’s Lord is in deep exaltation, joining Lagn’s Lord, as 
Guru is with another benefic. Nine will be the number of sons, that one will beget, if 
Guru is in deep exaltation, as Rahu is with Dhan’s Lord and Dharm is occupied by its 
own Lord. There will be eight sons, if Guru is in Putr, or Dharm Bhava, while Putr’s 
Lord is endowed with strength and Dhan’s Lord is in Karm Bhava. Sani in Dharm 
Bhava, while Putr’s Lord is in Putr itself, gives 7 sons, out of which twins will be born 
twice. If Putr’s Lord is in Putr in Yuti with Dhan’s Lord, there will be birth of 7 sons, out 
of which 3 will pass away. Only one son is denoted, if there be a malefic in Putr Bhava, 
while Guru is in the 5th from Sani, or vice versa. If Putr Bhava has a malefic in it, or, if 
Sani is in the 5th from Guru, the native will beget offspring only through his second, or 
third wife. Should Putr be occupied by a malefic, while Guru is yuti with Sani in Putr 
Bhava, as Lagn’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava and Putr’s Lord is yuti with Mangal, one will 
live long, but lose his children one after the other, as they are born. 


Ch. 17. Effects of Ari Bhava 


1. O Brahmin, following are the effects, produced by Ari Bhava, relating to diseases, 
ulcers etc. Listen to this attentively. 


2. Ulcers/Bruises. Should Ari’s Lord be in Ari itself, or in Lagn, or Randhr, there will be 
ulcers, or bruises on the body. The Rasi, becoming Ari Bhava, will lead to the 
knowledge of the concerned limb. 


3-5. Relatives Affected. The Karak of a relative, or the Lord of such a Bhava, joining 
Ari’s Lord, or being in Ari, or Randhr Bhava, indicates ulcers/bruises to such a relative, 
like father. Stirya with such lordship and in such a Bhava denotes such affectation of 
head, Candr of the face, Mangal of the neck, Budh of the navel, Guru of the nose, Sukr 
of the eyes, Sani of the feet and the Rahu and Ketu of the abdomen. 


6. Facial Diseases. Should Lagn’s Lord be in a Rasi of Mangal, or of Budh and has a 
Drishti on Budh, there will be diseases of the face. 


7-8'4. Leprosy. Mangal, or Budh, having ownership of the ascending R4asi and joining 
Candr, Rahu and Sani, will cause leprosy. If Candr is in Lagn, which is not however 
Cancer, and be with Rahu, there will occur white leprosy. Sani in place of Rahu will 
cause black leprosy, while Mangal similarly will afflict one with blood-leprosy. 


9-12'4. Diseases in General. When Lagn is occupied by the Lords of Ari and Randhr 
Bhava along with Strya, the native will be afflicted by fever and tumours. Mangal, 
replacing Stirya, will cause swelling and hardening of the blood vessels and wounds and 
hits by weapons. Budh so featuring will bring in billious diseases, while Guru in similar 
case will destroy any 


disease. Similarly Sukr will cause diseases through females, Sani windy diseases, Rahu 
danger through low-caste-men and Ketu navel diseases. Candr in Yuti with the Lords of 
Ari and Randhr Bhava will inflict dangers through water and phlegmatic disorders. 
Similar estimates be made from the respective significators and Bhavas for relatives, 
like father. 


13-19'4 TIMING OF ILLNESS. The native will be afflicted by illness throughout life, if 
Sani is with Rahu, while Ari Lord and 6th Bhava are yuti with malefics. One will suffer 
from (severe) fever at the age of 6 and at the age of 12, if Mangal is in Ari, while Ari 
Lord is in Randhr. If the Candr is in Dhanu/Meen, while Guru is in Ari from Lagn, one 
will suffer from leprosy at the age of 19 and 22. If Rahu is in Ari, Lagna Lord is in 
Randhr and Mandi is in an angle, consumption will trouble the native at the age of 26. 
Spleenary disorders will be experienced at the age of 29 and 30, if the Lords of 6th and 
12th are in exchange of their Rasis. Sani and Candr together in Ari will inflict blood- 
leprosy at the age of 45. If Sani is with an inimical planet, while Lagn Lord is in Lagn 
itself, windy disorders (like rheumatism) will trouble the native at the age of 59. 


20-22. UNFORTUNATE YEARS. Should Candr be yuti with Ari Lord, while the 8th 
Lord is in Ari and the 12th Lord is in Lagn, the native will be troubled by animals at the 
age of eight. O Brahmin, if Rahu is in Ari, while Sani is in Randhr from the said Rahu, 
the child will have danger through fire at the age of 1 and 2, while in Sahaj year birds 
will bring some evils. 


23-25. UNFORTUNATE YEARS (continued). Danger through water will have to be 
feared during Putr and Dharm years, if Stirya is in Ari, or Randhr, while Candr is in 
Vyaya from the said Sirya. Sani in Randhr, as Mangal is in Yuvati, all cause small-pox 
in Karm year and in 30th year of age. If 8th Lord joins Rahu in an angle/trine from 


Randhr Bhava and be in Randhr in Navamsa, the subject will be troubled by swelling of 
blood vessels, urinary disorders etc. during the 18th year and the 22nd year. 


26. LOSS THROUGH ENEMIES. Loss of wealth will come to pass during the 31st 
year, if Labh and 6th Lords exchange their Rasis. 


27. INIMICAL SONS. One’s own sons will be his enemies, if Putr Lord is in Ari, while 
Ari Lord is with Guru. Simultaneously Vyaya Lord should be in Lagn. 


28. FEAR FROM DOGS. There will be fear from dogs during the 10th and 19th year, if 
the Lagna Lord and the 6th Lord are in exchange. 


Ch. 18. Effects of Yuvati Bhava 


1. O excellent of the Brahmins, listen to me, detailing the effects of the 7th Bhava. If 
Yuvati Lord is in his own RA&si, or in exaltation, one will derive full happiness through 
his wife (and marriage). 


2. SICK WIFE. Should Yuvati Lord be in Ari, 8th, or Vyaya, the wife will be sickly. This 
however does not apply to own Bhava, or exaltation placement, as above. 


3. Excessive: Libidinousness/Death ‘of: Wife. If Sukr is in Yuvati, the native will be 
exceedingly libidinous. If Sukr yuti a malefic in any Bhava, it will cause loss of wife. 


4-5. THE 7TH LORD. Should Yuvati Lord be endowed with strength and be yuti with, 
or be drishtied by a benefic, the native will be wealthy, honourable, happy and fortunate. 
Conversely, if Yuvati Lord is in fall, or is combust, or is in an enemy’s Rasi, one will 
acquire sick wives and many wives. 


6. PLURALITY OF WIVES. If Yuvati Lord is in a Rasi of Sani, or of Sukr and be 
drishtied by a benefic, there will be many wives. Should Yuvati Lord be particularly in 
exaltation, the same effects will come to pass. 


7-8%. MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS. The native will befriend barren females, if 
Surya is in Yuvati. Candr therein will cause association with such female, as 
corresponding to the Rasi, becoming Yuvati. Mangal, placed in Yuvati, will denote 
association with marriageable girls (those with menses), or with barren females. Budh 
indicates harlots, mean females and females, belonging to traders’ community. Wife of a 
Brahmin, or a pregnant female will be in the native’s association, if Guru is in Yuvati. 
Base females and females, having attained their courses, are denoted by Sani, Rahu/Ketu 
in Yuvati. 


8-94. Mangal denotes a female with attractive breasts. Sani indicates sick and weak 
spouse. Guru will bring a spouse with hard and prominent breasts. Sukr will bring one 
with bulky and excellent breasts. 


10-13’4. Malefics in Vyaya and 7th, while decreasing Candr is in Putr denote, that the 
native will be controlled by spouse, who will be inimical to the race (or family). If 
Yuvati Bhava is occupied, or owned by Sani/Mangal, the native will beget a harlot, as 
his spouse, or he will be attached to other illegally. Should Sukr be in a Navamsa of 
Mangal, or in a Rasi of Mangal, or receive a Drishti from, or be yuti with Mangal, the 
native will “kiss” the private parts of the female. If Sukr is so related to Sani, the native 
will “kiss” the private parts of the male. 


14-15. WORTHY SPOUSE. The native will beget a spouse endowed with (the seven 
principal) virtues, who will expand his dynasty by sons and grandsons, if the 7th Lord is 
exalted, while Yuvati is occupied by strong Lagna Lord and a benefic. 


16. EVILS TO SPOUSE. If Yuvati Bhava, or its Lord is yuti with a malefic the native’s 
wife will incur evils, especially, if Yuvati Bhava, or its Lord is bereft of strength. 


17. LOSS OF SPOUSE. If Yuvati Lord is devoid of strength and is relegated to Ari, 8th, 
or Vyaya, or, if Yuvati Lord is in fall, the native’s wife will be destroyed (i.e. she will die 
early). 


18. LACK OF CONJUGAL FELICITY. If Candr is in Yuvati, as Yuvati Lord is in Vyaya 
and the Karaka (indicator Sukr) is bereft of strength, the native will not be endowed with 
marital happiness. 


19-21. PLURALITY OF WIVES. One will have two wives, if Yuvati Lord is in fall, or in 
a malefic Rasi along with a malefic, while Yuvati Bhava, or the 7th Navamsa belong to a 
eunuch planet. If Mangal and Sukr are in Yuvati, or, if Sani is Yuvati, while the Lord of 
Lagn is in Randhr, the native will have 3 wives. There will be many wives, if Sukr is in a 
Dual Rasi, while its Lord is in exaltation, as Yuvati Lord is endowed with strength. 


22. TIME OF MARRIAGE (upto Sloka 34). If Yuvati Lord is in a benefic’s Bhava (or in 
Dharm, as Subha Rasi so means), while Sukr is exalted, or is in own RAsi, the native will 
marry at the age of 5, or 9. 


23. If Sirya is in Yuvati, while his dispositor is yuti with Sukr, there will be marriage at 
7th, or 11th year of age. 


24. Sukr in Dhan, while Yuvati Lord is in Labh will give marriage at the age of 10, or 
16. 


25. Marriage will take place during the 11th year, if Sukr is in an angle from Lagn, while 
Lagn Lord is in Makar, or Kumbh. 


26. The native will marry at 12, or 19, if Sukr is in an angle from the Lagna, while Sani 
is in Yuvati counted from Sukr. 


27. Should Sukr be in Yuvati from Candr, while Sani is in Yuvati from Sukr, marriage 
will be in the 18th year. 


28. Marriage will be in the 15th year, if Dhan Lord is in Labh, while Lagn Lord is in 
Karm. 


29. An exchange between the Lords of Dhan and Labh will bring marriage 13 years after 
birth. 


30. Ones 22nd/27th year will confer marriage, if Sukr is in Yuvati from the 8th Bhava 
(i.e. Dhan from Lagna), while his dispositor is yuti with Mangal. 


31. Should Yuvati Lord be in Vyaya, while the natal Lord is in Yuvati in Navamsa, 
marriage will be in 23rd/26th year of age. 


32. Either the 25th year, or the 33rd year will bring marriage, if Randhr Lord is in 
Yuvati, as Sukr is in Navamsa Lagna. 


33. Should Sukr be in Dharm from Dharm (i.e. in Putr Bhava), while Rahu is in one of 
the said Bhavas (i.e. in Putr/Dharm), marriage will take place during 31st, or 33rd year. 


34. The native will marry at 30, or 27, if Sukr is in Lagn, while the 7th Lord is in Yuvati 
itself. 


35-39. TIMING OF WIFE’S DEATH. Loss of wife will occur in the 18th year, or 33rd 
year of age of the native, if Yuvati Lord is in fall, while Sukr is in Randhr. One will lose 
his spouse in his 19th year, if Yuvati Lord is in the 8th, while Vyaya Lord is in Yuvati. 
The native’s wife will die within three days of marriage due to snake bite, if the native 
has Rahu in Dhan and Mangal in Yuvati. If Sukr is in Randhr, while his dispositor is in a 
Rasi of Sani, death of wife will take place during the native’s 12th, or 21st year of age. 
Should the ascendat Lord be in his Rasi of debilitation, as Dhan Lord is in Randhr, loss 
of wife will occur in the 13th year of age. 


40-41. THREE MARRIAGES. Should Candr be in Yuvati from Sukr, while Budh is in 
Yuvati from Candr and Randhr Lord is in Putr (from the Lagna), there will be marriage 


in Karm year followed by another in the 22nd year and yet another in the 33rd year. 


42. DEATH OF WIFE. If Ari, 7th and 8th are in their order occupied by Mangal, Rahu 
and Sani, the native’s wife will not live (long). 


Ch. 19. Effects of Randhr Bhava 


1. Long Life. O excellent of the Brahmins, listen to me speak on the effects of Randhr 
Bhava. If Randhr’s Lord is in an angle, long life is indicated. 


2. Short Life. Should Randhr’s Lord join Lagn’s Lord, or a malefic and be in Randhr 
itself, the native will be short lived. 


3. Sani and Karm’s Lord about Longevity. Similarly consider Sani and Karm’s Lord in 
the matter of longevity. Karm’s Lord is in Randhr along with a malefic Grah and/or 
Lagn’s Lord. 


4-7. Long Life. There will be long life, if Ari’s Lord is in Vyaya, or, if Ari’s Lord is in 
Ari, as Vyaya’s Lord is in Vyaya, or, if Ari’s Lord and Vyaya’s Lord are in Lagn and 
Randhr. If the Lords of Putr, Randhr and Tanu Bhava are in own Navansas, own RAsis, 
or in friendly Rasis, the native will enjoy a long span of life. Should the Lords of Lagn, 
Randhr and Karm Bhava and Sani are all disposed severally in an angle, in a trine, or in 
Labh Bhava, the subject will live long. Like these, there are many other Yogas, dealing 
with the issue of longevity. The strength and weakness of the Grahas concerned be 
estimated in deciding longevity. 


8-13. Short Life. One’s span of life will be between 20 and 32 years, if Lagn’s Lord is 
weak, while Randhr’s Lord is an angle. The native will only be short-lived, if Randhr’s 
Lord is in fall, while Randhr Bhava has a malefic in it and Tanu Bhava is bereft of 
strength. Death will be instant at birth, if Randhr Bhava, Randhr’s Lord and Vyaya 
Bhava are all conjunct malefics. Malefics in angles and/or trines and benefics in Ari 
and/or Randhr Bhava, while Tanu Bhava has in it Randhr’s Lord in fall: this Yoga will 
cause immediate end. If Putr and Randhr Bhava and Randhr’s Lord are all conjunct 
malefics, the life span will be very brief. Within a month of birth, death will befall the 
child, if Randhr’s Lord is in Randhr itself, while Candr is with malefics and be bereft of 
beneficial Drishti. 


14-15. Long Life (again). One will be long-lived, if Lagn’s Lord is in exaltation, while 
Candr and Guru are, respectively, in Labh and Randhr Bhava. If Lagn’s Lord is 
exceedingly strong and receives a Drishti from a benefic, which is placed in an angle, 
the person concerned will be wealthy, virtuous and long-lived. 


Ch. 20. Effects of Dharm Bhava 


(1) Combinations for Fortunes. O Brahmin, now listen to the effects of Dharm Bhava. 
One will be fortunate (or affluent), if Dharm’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava with strength. 


(2) Should Guru be in Dharm Bhava, while Dharm’s Lord is in an angle and Lagn’s 
Lord is endowed with strength, one will be extremely fortunate. 


3. Fortunate (Affluent) Father. If Dharm’s Lord is with strength, as Sukr is in Dharm, 
while Guru is in an angle from Tanu Bhava, the native’s father is fortunate. 


4. Indigent Father. If Dharm’s Lord is debilitated, while the 2nd and/or the 4th from 
Dharm Bhava is occupied by Mangal, the native’s father is poor. 


5. Long-living Father. Should Dharm’s Lord be in deep exaltation, while Sukr is in an 
angle from Tanu Bhava and Guru is in the 9th from Navans Lagn, the father of the 
native will enjoy a long span of life. 


6. Royal Status for Father. If Dharm’s Lord is an angle and receives a Drishti from Guru, 
the native’s father will be a king endowed with conveyances, or be equal to a king. 


7. Wealthy and Famous Father. Should Dharm’s Lord be in Karm Bhava, while Karm’s 
Lord receives a Drishti from a benefic the native’s father will be very rich and famous. 


8-9. Virtuous and Devoted to Father. Should Surya be in deep exaltation, as Dharm’s 
Lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will be virtuous, dear to the king and devoted to father. 
If Stirya is in a trine from Lagna, while Dharm’s Lord is in Yuvati in yuti with, or 
receiving a Drishti from Guru, the native will be devoted to his father. 


10. Fortunes etc. Acquisition of fortunes, conveyances and fame will follow the 32nd 
year of age, if Dharm’s Lord is in Dhan, while Dhan’s Lord is in Dharm. 


11. Inimical to Father. There will be mutual enmity between the father and the native, if 
Lagn’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, but with the Lord of Ari. Further, the native’s father 
will be of contemptible disposition. 


12. Begged Food. If Karm’s Lord and Sahaj’s Lord are bereft of strength, while Dharm’s 
Lord is in fall, or combust the native will go begging for his food. 


13-25. Combinations for Father’s Death. The father of the native would have passed 
away prior to the native’s birth, if Sirya is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, as Randhr’s 
Lord is in Dharm Bhava, Vyaya’s Lord is in Tanu Bhava and Ari’s Lord is in Putr Bhava. 


Should Stirya be in Randhr Bhava, while Randhr’s Lord is in Dharm, the native’s father 
will pass away within a year of his birth. If the Lord of Vyaya Bhava is in Dharm Bhava, 
while Dharm’s Lord is in its debilitation Navans, the native’s father will face his end 
during the 3rd, or the 16th year of the native. Death of father will occur in the 2nd, or the 
12th year, if Lagn’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, as Randhr’s Lord is with Strya. Should 
Rahu be in the 8th from Dharm, as Sirya is in the 9th from Dharm, death of father will 
take place in the 16th, or the 18th year of the native. If Sani is in the 9th from Candr, as 
Surya is with Rahu, the native’s father will die in the 7th, or the 19th year of the native. 
The native in his 44th year will lose his father, if Dharm’s Lord is in Vyaya, as Vyaya’s 
Lord is in Dharm. If Lagn’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, as Candr is in Strya’s Navans, the 
native in his 35th, or 41st year will lose his father. One will lose his father in the 50th 
year, if Sirya, being the Lord of Dharm, is conjunct Mangal and Sani. If Siirya is in the 
7th from Dharm Bhava, as Rahu is in the 7th from Sahaj Bhava, the 6th, or 25th year of 
the native will be fatal for father. If Sani is in the 7th from Randhr Bhava, as Surya is in 
the 7th from Sani, the ages of 21, 26, or 30 will be fatal for the father. If Dharm’s Lord is 
in its debilitation Rasi, while his dispositor is in Dharm Bhava, the native will lose his 
father at the age of 26, or 30. Thus the Jyotishis may know the effects. 


26. Fortunes. One will enjoy abundant fortunes, if Sukr is in deep exaltation and be in 
the company of Dharm’s Lord, as Sani is in Sahaj. 


27-28. Fortunate Periods. Abundant fortunes be acquired after the 20th year, if Dharm 
has Guru in it, as its Lord is in an angle from Lagn. Should Budh be in his deep 
exaltation, as Dharm’s Lord is in Dharm itself, abundant fortunes will be earned after the 
36th year. 


29. Should Lagn’s Lord be in Dharm, as Dharm’s Lord is in Lagn and Guru is in Yuvati, 
there will be gains of wealth and conveyances. 


30. Lack of Fortunes. If Rahu is in the 9th from Dharm Bhava, as his dispositor is in 
Randhr Bhava and Dharm’s Lord is in fall, the native be devoid of fortunes. 


31. Food by Begging. Should Sani be in Dharm Bhava along with Candr, as Lagn’s Lord 
is in fall, the native will acquire food by begging. 


32. O Brahmin, these are the effects related to Dharm Bhava. I have explained briefly. 
These may be estimated with the help of the state of the Lords of Lagn and Dharm 
Bhava and in other manners as well. 


Ch. 21. Effects of Karm Bhava 


1. Inow explain the effects of Karm Bhava. Listen to these, 0 Maitreya, in the words of 


Brahma, Garga and others. 


2. Paternal Happiness. If Karm’s Lord is strong and in exaltation, or in its own 
Rasi/Navans, the native will derive extreme paternal happiness, will enjoy fame and will 
perform good deeds. 


3. If Karm’s Lord is devoid of strength, the native will face obstructions in his work. If 
Rahu is in an angle, or in a trine, he will perform religious sacrifices, like Jyotishtoma. 


4. If Karm’s Lord is with a benefic, or be in an auspicious Bhava, one will always gain 
through royal patronage and in business. In a contrary situation, only opposite results 
will come to pass. 


5. Should Karm and Labh Bhava be both occupied by malefics, the native will indulge 
only in bad deeds and will defile his own men. 


6. If the Lord of Karm Bhava is relegated to Randhr Bhava along with Rahu, the native 
will hate others; be a great fool and will do bad deeds. 


7. If Sani, Mangal and Karm’s Lord are in Yuvati, as Yuvati’s Lord is with a malefic, the 
native will be fond of carnal pleasures and of filling his belly. 


8-10 Should Karm’s Lord be in exaltation and be in the company of Guru, as Dharm’s 
Lord is in Karm the native will be endowed with honour, wealth and valour. One will 
lead a happy life, if Labh’s Lord is in Karm and Karm’s Lord is in Lagn, or, if the Lord 
of Karm Bhava is yuti with the Lord of Labh Bhava in an angle. Should Karm’s Lord in 
strength be in Meen along Guru, the native will doubtless obtain robes, ornaments and 
happiness. 


11. Should Rahu, Surya, Sani and Mangal be in Labh Bhava, the native will incur 
cessation of his duties. 


12. One will be learned and wealthy, if Guru is in Meen along with Sukr, while Lagn’s 
Lord is strong and Candr is in exaltation. 


13. Should Karm’s Lord be in Labh, while Labh’s Lord is in Tanu Bhava and Sukr is in 
Karm, the native will be endowed with precious stones. 


14. If the Karm’s Lord is exalted in an angle, or a trine and is yuti with Guru, or receives 
a Drishti from Guru, one will be endowed with deeds. 


15. Should Karm’s Lord be in Lagn along with Lagn’s Lord, as Candr is in an angle, or 


in a trine, the native will be interested in good deeds. 


16. If Sani is in Karm Bhava along with a debilitated Grah, while Karm Bhava in the 
Navans Kundali is occupied by a malefic, the native will be bereft of acts. 


17. One will indulge in bad acts, if Karm’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, while Randhr’s 
Lord is in Karm Bhava with a malefic. 


18. Obstructions to the native’s acts will crop up, if Karm’s Lord is in fall, as both Karm 
Bhava and the 10th from Karm Bhava have malefic occupations. 


19-21. Combinations for Fame. One will be endowed with fame, if Candr is in Karm 
Bhava, while Karm’s Lord is in a trine from Karm Bhava and Lagn’s Lord is in Lagn’s 
angle. Similar effects will come to pass, if Labh’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, while Karm’s 
Lord is strong and gives a Drishti to Guru. Fame will come to the native, if Karm’s Lord 
is in Dharm Bhava, as Lagn’s Lord is in Karm Bhava and Candr is in Putr Bhava. 


22. O excellent of the Brahmins, thus have been told about the effects of Karm Bhava in 
a brief manner. Other related effects be guessed by you based on the relationship of the 
Lords of Lagn and of Karm Bhava. 


Ch. 22. Effects of Labh Bhava 


1. O excellent of the Brahmins, I now explain effects relating to Labh Bhava, the 
auspiciousness of which Bhava will make one happy at all times. 


2. Should Labh’s Lord be in Labh itself, or be in an angle, or in a trine from Lagn, there 
will be many gains. Similarly, if Labh’s Lord is exalted, though in combustion there will 
be many gains. 


3. If Labh’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, while Dhan’s Lord is in an angle along with Guru, 
the gains will be great. 


4. If Labh’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, while Labh Bhava is occupied by a benefic, the 
native will gain 2000 Nishkas in his 36th year. 


5. If Labh’s Lord is yuti with a benefic in an angle, or in a trine, the native will acquire 
500 Nishkas in his 40th year. 


6. The native will own 6000 Nishkas, if Labh Bhava is occupied by Guru, while Dhan 
Bhava and Dharm Bhava are, respectively, taken over by Candr and Sukr by position. 


7. Should Guru, Budh and Candr be in the 11th from Labh, the native will be endowed 
with wealth, grains, fortunes, diamonds, ornaments etc. 


8. One will gain 1000 Nishkas in his 33rd year, if Labh’s Lord is in Lagn and Lagn’s 
Lord is in Labh Bhava. 


9. If Labh’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, as Dhan’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, one will amass 
abundant fortunes after marriage. 


10. If Labh’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, as Sahaj’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, one will gain 
wealth through co-borns and will be endowed with excellent ornaments. 


11. There will be no gains in spite of numerous efforts, if Labh’s Lord is in fall, in 
combustion, or be in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava with a malefic. 


Ch. 23. Effects of Vyaya Bhava 


1-4. O Brahmin, now I tell you about the effects of Vyaya Bhava. There will be expenses 
on good accounts, if Vyaya’s Lord is with a benefic, or in his own Bhava, or exalted, or, 
if a benefic occupies Vyaya. One will own beautiful houses and beds and be endowed 
with superior scented articles and pleasures, if Candr happens to be Vyaya’s Lord and be 
exalted, or be in its own Rasi and/or Navans, or in Labh/Dharm/Putr Bhava in 
Rasi/Navans. The said native will live with rich clothes and ornaments, be learned and 
Lordly. 


5-6. And, if Vyaya’s Lord is in Ari, or Randhr Bhava, or be in enemy’s Navans, in 
debilitation Navans, or in Randhr Bhava in Navans, one will be devoid of happiness 
from wife, be troubled by expenses and deprived of general happiness. If he be in an 
angle, or trine, the native will beget a spouse. 


7. Just as these effects are derived from Tanu Bhava in regard to the native, similar 
deductions be made about co-borns etc. from Sahaj and other Bhavas. 


8. Grahas placed in the visible half of the zodiac will give explicit results, while the ones 
in the invisible half will confer secret results. 


9. If Rahu is in Vyaya along with Mangal, Sani and Sirya, the native will go to hell. 
Similar effect will occur, if Vyaya’s Lord is with Surya. 


10. If there is a benefic in Vyaya, while its Lord is exalted, or is yuti with, or receives a 
Drishti from a benefic, one will attain final emancipation. 


11. One will wander from country to country, if Vyaya’s Lord and Vyaya Bhava are with 
malefics and Vyaya’s Lord gives a Drishti to, or receives a Drishti from malefics. 


12. One will move in his own country, if Vyaya’s Lord and Vyaya Bhava are with 
benefics and Vyaya’s Lord gives a Drishti to, or receives a Drishti from benefics. 


13. Earnings will be through sinful measures, if Vyaya is occupied by Sani, or Mangal 
etc. and is not receiving a Drishti from a benefic. 


14. If Lagn’s Lord is in Vyaya, while Vyaya’s Lord is in Lagn with Sukr, expenses will 
be on religious grounds. 


Ch. 24. Effects of the Bhava Lords 


1. Effects of Lagn’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 12). Should Lagn’s Lord be in 
Lagn itself, the native will be endowed with physical happiness and prowess. He will be 
intelligent, fickle-minded, will have two wives and will unite with other females. 


2. If the Lagn’s Lord is in Dhan, he will be gainful, scholarly, happy, endowed with good 
qualities, be religious, honourable and will have many wives. 


3. If Lagn’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will equal a lion in valour, be endowed 
with all kinds of wealth, be honourable, will have two wives, be intelligent and happy. 


4. If Lagn’s Lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be endowed with paternal and 
maternal happiness, will have many brothers, be lustful, virtuous and charming. 


5. If Lagn’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will have mediocre progenic happiness, 
will lose his first child, be honourable, given to anger and be dear to king. 


6. If Lagn’s Lord is in Ari Bhava and related to a malefic the native will be devoid of 
physical happiness and will be troubled by enemies, if there is no benefic Drishti. 


7. If Lagn’s Lord is a malefic and is placed in Yuvati Bhava, the natives wife will not 
live (long). If the Grah in question is a benefic, one will wander aimlessly, face penury 
and be dejected. He will alternatively become a king (if the said Grah is strong). 


8. If Lagn’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be an accomplished scholar, be 
sickly, thievish, be given to much anger, be a gambler and will join others’ wives. 


9. If Lagn’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be fortunate, dear to people, be a 
devotee of Sri Vishnu, be skilful, eloquent in speech and be endowed with wife, sons 


and wealth. 


10. If Lagn’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be endowed with paternal 
happiness, royal honour, fame among men and will doubtlessly have self-earned wealth. 


11. If Lagn’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will always be endowed with gains, good 
qualities, fame and many wives. 


(12) If Lagn’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava and is devoid of benefic Drishti and/or Yuti, the 
native will be bereft of physical happiness, will spend unfruitfully and be given to much 
anger. 


13. Effects of Dhan’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 24). If Dhan’s Lord is in Tanu 
Bhava, the native will be endowed with sons and wealth, be inimical to his family, 
lustful, hard-hearted and will do others’ jobs. 


14. If Dhan’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be wealthy, proud, will have two, or 
more wives and be bereft of progeny. 


15. If Dhan’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be valorous, wise, virtuous, lustful 
and miserly; all these, when related to a benefic. If related to a malefic, the native will be 
a heterodox. 


16. If Dhan’s Lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will acquire all kinds of wealth. If 
Dhan’s Lord is exalted and is yuti with Guru, one will be equal to a king. 


17. If Dhan’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be wealthy. Not only the native, but 
also his sons will be intent on earning wealth. 


18. If Dhan’s Lord is in Ari Bhava along with a benefic, the native will gain wealth 
through his enemies; if Dhan’s Lord is yuti with a malefic, there will be loss through 
enemies apart from mutilation of shanks. 


19. If Dhan’s Lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be addicted to others’ wives and he 
will be a doctor. If a malefic is related to the said placement by yuti with Dhan’s Lord, or 
by Drishti, the native’s wife will be of questionable character. 


20. If Dhan’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be endowed with abundant land 
and wealth. But he will have limited marital felicity and be bereft of happiness from his 


elder brother. 


21. If Dhan’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be wealthy, diligent, skilful, sick 


during childhood and will later on be happy and will visit shrines, observing religious 
code etc. 


22. If Dhan’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be libidinous, honourable and 
learned; he will have many wives and much wealth, but he will be bereft of filial 
happiness. 


23. If Dhan’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will have all kinds of wealth, be ever 
diligent, honourable and famous. 


24. If Dhan’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be adventurous, be devoid of 
wealth and be interested in other’s wealth, while his eldest child will not keep him 


happy. 


25. Effects of Sahaj’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 36). If Sahaj’s Lord is in 
Tanu Bhava, the native will have self-made wealth, be disposed to worship, be valorous 
and be intelligent, although devoid of learning. 


26. If Sahaj’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be corpulent, devoid of valour, will 
not make much efforts, be not happy and will have an eye on others’ wives and others’ 
wealth. 


27. If Sahaj’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be endowed with happiness through 
co-born and will have wealth and sons, be cheerful and extremely happy. 


28. If Sahaj’s Lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be happy, wealthy and intelligent, 
but will acquire a wicked spouse. 


29. If Sahaj’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will have sons and be virtuous. If in the 
process Sahaj’s Lord be yuti with, or receives a Drishti from a malefic, the native will 


have a formidable wife. 


30. If Sahaj’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will be inimical to his co-born, be affluent, 
will not be well disposed to his maternal uncle and be dear to his maternal aunt. 


31. If Sahaj’s Lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be interested in serving the king. 
He will not be happy during boyhood, but the end of his life he will be happy. 


32. If Sahaj’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be a thief, will derive his 
livelihood serving others and will die at the gate of the royal palace. 


33. If Sahaj’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will lack paternal bliss, will make 


fortunes through wife and will enjoy progenic and other pleasures. 


34. If Sahaj’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will have all lands of happiness and 
self-made wealth and be interested in nurturing wicked females. 


35. If Sahaj’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, then native will always gain in trading, be 
intelligent, although not literate, be adventurous and will serve others. 


36. If Sahaj’s Lord is in Vyaya, the native will spend on evil deeds, will have a wicked 
father and will be fortunate through a female. 


37. Effects of Bandhu’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 48). If Bandhu’s Lord is in 
Tanu Bhava, the native will be endowed with learning, virtues, ornaments, lands, 
conveyances and maternal happiness. 


38. If Bandhu’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will enjoy pleasures, all kinds of 
wealth, family life and honour and be adventurous. He will be cunning in disposition. 


39. If Bandhu’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be valorous, will have servants, 
be liberal, virtuous and charitable and will possess self-earned wealth. He will be free 
from diseases. 


40. If Bandhu’s Lord is in Bandhu, the native will be a minister and will possess all 


kinds of wealth. He will be skilful, virtuous, honourable, learned, happy and be well 
disposed to his spouse. 


41. If Bandhu’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be happy and be liked by all. He 
will be devoted to Sri Vishnu, be virtuous, honourable and will have self-earned wealth. 


42. If Bandhu’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will be devoid of maternal happiness, be 
given to anger, be a thief and a conjurer, be independent in action and be indisposed. 


43. If Bandhu’s Lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be endowed with a high degree 
of education, will sacrifice his patrimony and be akin to the dumb in an assembly. 


44. If Bandhu’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be devoid of domestic and 
other comforts, will not enjoy much parental happiness and be equal to a neuter. 


45. If Bandhu’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be dear to one and all, be 
devoted to God, be virtuous, honourable and endowed with every land of happiness. 


46. If Bandhu’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will enjoy royal honours, be an 


alchemist, be extremely pleased, will enjoy pleasures and will conquer his five senses. 


47. If Bandhu’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will have fear of secret disease, he 
will be liberal, virtuous, charitable and helpful to others. 


48. If Bandhu’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava the native will be devoid of domestic and other 
comforts, will have vices and be foolish and indolent. 


49. Effects of Putr’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 60). If Putr’s Lord is in Lagn, 
the native will be scholarly, be endowed with progenic happiness, be a miser, be crooked 
and will steal others’ wealth. 


50. If Putr’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will have many sons and wealth, be a 
pater familias, be honourable, be attached to his spouse and be famous in the world. 


51. If Putr’s Lord is in Sahaj, the native will be attached to his co-born, be a tale bearer 
and a miser and be always interested in his own work. 


52. If Putr’s Lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be happy, endowed with maternal 
happiness, wealth and intelligence and be a king, or a minister, or a preceptor. 


53. If Putr’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will have progeny, if related to a benefic; 
there will be no issues, if malefic is related to Putr’s Lord, placed in Putr Bhava. Putr’s 
Lord in Putr Bhava will, however, make one virtuous and dear to friends. 


54. If Putr’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will obtain such sons, who will be equal to 
his enemies, or will lose them, or will acquire an adopted, or purchased son. 


55. If Putr’s Lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be honourable, very religious, 
endowed with progenic happiness and be helpful to others. 


56. If Putr’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will not have much progenic happiness, 
be troubled by cough and pulmonary disorders, be given to anger and be devoid of 


happiness. 


57. If Putr’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be a prince, or equal to him, will 
author treatises, be famous and will shine in his race. 


58. If Putr’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will enjoy a Raj Yog and various 
pleasures and be very famous. 


59. If Putr’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will be learned, dear to people, be an 


author of treatises, be very skilful and be endowed with many sons and wealth. 


60. If Putr’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be bereft of happiness from his own 
sons, will have an adopted, or purchased son. 


61. Effects of Ari’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 72). If Ari’s Lord is in Tanu 
Bhava, the native will be sickly, famous, inimical to his own men, rich, honourable, 
adventurous and virtuous. 


62. If Ari’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be adventurous, famous among his 
people, will live in alien countries, be happy, be a skilful speaker and be always 
interested in his own work. 


63. If Ari’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be given to anger, be bereft of 
courage, inimical to all of his co-born and will have disobedient servants. 


64. If Ari’s Lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be devoid maternal happiness, be 
intelligent, be a tale bearer, be jealous, evil-minded and very rich. 


65. If Ari’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will have fluctuating finances. He will incur 
enmity with his sons and friends. He will be happy, selfish and kind. 


66. If Ari’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will have enmity with the group of his 
kinsmen, but be friendly to others and will enjoy mediocre happiness in matters, like 
wealth. 


67. If Ari’s Lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be deprived of happiness through 
wedlock. He will be famous, virtuous, honourable, adventurous and wealthy. 


68. If Ari’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be sickly, inimical, will desire 
others’ wealth, be interested in others’ wives and be impure. 


69. If Ari’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will trade in wood and stones (‘Pashan’ 
also means poison) and will have fluctuating professional fortunes. 


70. If Ari’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be well known among his men, will 
not be respectfully disposed to his father and will be happy in foreign countries. He will 
be a gifted speaker. 


71. If Ari’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will gain wealth through his enemies, be 
virtuous, adventurous and will be somewhat bereft of progenic happiness. 


72. If Ari’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will always spend on vices, be hostile to 
learned people and will torture living beings. 


73. Effects of Yuvati’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 84). If Yuvati’s Lord is in 
Tanu Bhava, the native will go to others’ wives, be wicked, skilful, devoid of courage 
and afflicted by windy diseases. 


74. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will have many wives, will gain wealth 
through his wife and be procrastinating in nature. 


75. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will face loss of children and 
sometimes with great difficulty there will exist a living son. There is also the possibility 
of birth of a daughter. 


76. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the wife of the native will not be under his 
control. He will be fond of truth, intelligent and religious. He will suffer from dental 
diseases. 


77. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be honourable, endowed with all 
(i.e. seven principal) virtues, always delighted and endowed with all kinds of wealth. 


78. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will beget a sickly wife and he will be 
inimical to her. He will be given to anger and will be devoid of happiness. 


79. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be endowed with happiness 
through wife, be courageous, skilful and intelligent, but only afflicted by windy diseases. 


80. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be deprived of marital happiness. 
His wife will be troubled by diseases, be devoid of good disposition and will not obey 
the native. 


81. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will have union with many women, 
be well disposed to his own wife and will have many undertakings. 


82. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will beget a disobedient wife, will be 
religious and endowed with wealth, sons etc. 


83. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will gain wealth through his wife, be 
endowed with less happiness from sons etc. and will have daughters. 


84. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will incur penury, be a miser and his 
livelihood will be related to clothes. His wife will be a spendthrift. 


85. Effects of Randhr’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 96). If Randhr’s Lord is in 
Tanu Bhava, the native will be devoid of physical felicity and will suffer from wounds. 
He will be hostile to gods and Brahmins. 


86. If Randhr’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be devoid of bodily vigour, will 
enjoy a little wealth and will not regain lost wealth. 


87. If Randhr’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be devoid of fraternal happiness, 
be indolent and devoid of servants and strength. 


88. If Randhr’s Lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the child will be deprived of its mother. He 
will be devoid of a house, lands and happiness and will doubtlessly betray his friends. 


89. If Randhr’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be dull witted, will have limited 
number of children, be long-lived and wealthy. 


90. If Randhr’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will win over his enemies, be afflicted 
by diseases and during childhood will incur danger through snakes and water. 


91. If Randhr’s Lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will have two wives. If Randhr’s 
Lord is yuti with a malefic in Yuvati Bhava, there will surely be downfall in his 
business. 


92. If Randhr’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be long-lived. If the said Grah 
is weak, being in Randhr Bhava, the longevity will be medium, while the native will be 
a thief, be blameworthy and will blame others as well. 


93. If Randhr’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will betray his religion, be a 
heterodox, will beget a wicked wife and will steal others’ wealth. 


94. If Randhr’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be devoid of paternal bliss, be a 
talebearer and be bereft of livelihood. If there is a Drishti in the process from a benefic, 
then these evils will not mature. 


95. If Randhr’s Lord along with a malefic is in Labh Bhava, the native will be devoid of 
wealth and will be miserable in boyhood, but happy later on. Should Randhr’s Lord be 
yuti with a benefic and be in Labh Bhava, the native will be long-lived. 


96. If Randhr’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will spend on evil deeds and will 
incur a short life. More so, if there be additionally a malefic in the said Bhava. 


97. Effects of Dharm’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 103). If Dharm’s Lord is in 
Lagn, the native will be fortunate, will be honoured by the king, be virtuous, charming, 
learned and honoured by the public. 


98. If Dharm’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be a scholar, be dear to all, 
wealthy, sensuous and endowed with happiness from wife, sons etc. 


99. If Dharm’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be endowed with fraternal bliss, 
be wealthy, virtuous and charming. 


100. If Dharm’s Lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will enjoy houses, conveyances 
and happiness, will have all kinds of wealth and be devoted to his mother. 


101. If Dharm’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be endowed with sons and 
prosperity, devoted to elders, bold, charitable and learned. 


102. If Dharm’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will enjoy meagre prosperity, be devoid 
of happiness from maternal relatives and be always troubled by enemies. 


103. O Brahmin, If Dharm’s Lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native beget happiness after 
marriage, be virtuous and famous. 


104. If Dharm’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will not be prosperous and will not 
enjoy happiness from his elder brother. 


105. If Dharm’s Lord 1s in Dharm Bhava, the native will be endowed with abundant 
fortunes, virtues and beauty and will enjoy much happiness from co-born. 


106. If Dharm’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be a king, or equal to him, or be 
a minister, or an Army chief, be virtuous and dear to all. 


107. If Dharm’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will enjoy financial gains day by day, 
be devoted to elders, virtuous and meritorious in acts. 


108. If Dharm’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will incur loss of fortunes, will 
always spend on auspicious acts and will become poor on account of entertaining guests. 


109. Effects of Karm’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 120). If Karm’s Lord is in 
Tanu Bhava, the native will be scholarly, famous, be a poet, will incur diseases in 


boyhood and be happy later on. His wealth will increase day by day. 


110 If Karm’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be wealthy, virtuous, honoured by 


the king, charitable and will enjoy happiness from father and others. 


111. If Karm’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will enjoy happiness from brothers and 
servants, be valorous, virtuous, eloquent and truthful. 


112. If Karm’s Lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be happy, be always interested 
in his mother’s welfare, will Lord over conveyances, lands and houses, be virtuous and 
wealthy. 


113. If Karm’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be endowed with all kinds of 
learning, he will be always delighted and he will be wealthy and endowed with sons. 


114. If Karm’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will be bereft of paternal bliss. Although 
he may be skilful, he will be bereft of wealth and be troubled by enemies. 


115. If Karm’s Lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be endowed with happiness 
through wife, be intelligent, virtuous, eloquent, truthful and religious. 


116. If Karm’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be devoid of acts, long-lived and 
intent on blaming others. 


117. If Karm’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, one born of royal scion will become a king, 
whereas an ordinary native will be equal to a king. This placement will confer wealth 
and progenic happiness etc. 


118. If Karm’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be skilful in all jobs, be valorous, 
truthful and devoted to elders. 


119. If Karm’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will be endowed with wealth, 
happiness and sons. He will be virtuous, truthful and always delighted. 


120. If Karm’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will spend through royal abodes, will 
have fear from enemies and will be worried in spite of being skilful. 


121. Effects of Labh’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 132). If Labh’s Lord is in 
Tanu Bhava, the native will be genuine in disposition, be rich, happy, even-sighted, be a 
poet, be eloquent in speech and be always endowed with gains. 


122. If Labh’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be endowed with all kinds of 
wealth and all kinds of accomplishments, charitable, religious and always happy. 


123. If Labh’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be skilful in all jobs, wealthy, 


endowed with fraternal bliss and may sometimes incur gout pains. 


12. If Labh’s Lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will gain from maternal relatives, will 
undertake visits to shrines and will possess happiness of house and lands. 


125. If Labh’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be happy, educated and virtuous. He 
will be religious and happy. 


126. If Labh’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will be afflicted by diseases, be cruel, 
living in foreign places and troubled by enemies. 


127. If Labh’s Lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will always gain through his wife’s 
relatives, be liberal, virtuous, sensuous and will remain at the command of his spouse. 


128. If Labh’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will incur reversals in his 
undertakings and will live long, while his wife will predecease him. 


129. If Labh’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be fortunate, skilful, truthful, 
honoured by the king and be affluent. 


130. If Labh’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will be honoured by the king, be 
virtuous, attached to his religion, intelligent, truthful and will subdue his senses. 


131. If Labh’s Lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will gain in all his undertakings, while 
his learning and happiness will be on the increase day by day. 


132. If Labh’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will always depend on good deeds, be 
sensuous, will have many wives and will befriend barbarians. 


133. Effects of Vyaya’s Lord in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 144). If Vyaya’s Lord is in 
Tanu Bhava, the native will be a spendthrift, be weak in constitution, will suffer from 
phlegmatic disorders and be devoid of wealth and learning. 


134. If Vyaya’s Lord is in Dhan Bhava, the native will always spend on inauspicious 
deeds, be religious, will speak sweetly and will be endowed with virtues and happiness. 


135. If Vyaya’s Lord is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be devoid of fraternal bliss, will 
hate others and will promote self-nourishment. 


136. If Vyaya’s Lord is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be devoid of maternal 
happiness and will day by day accrue losses with respect to lands, conveyances and 
houses. 


137. If Vyaya’s Lord is in Putr Bhava, the native will be bereft of sons and learning. He 
will spend, as well as visit shrines in order to beget a son. 


138. If Vyaya’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, the native will incur enmity with his own men, be 
given to anger, be sinful, miserable and will go to others’ wives. 


(139) If Vyaya’s Lord is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will incur expenditure on account of 
his wife, will not enjoy conjugal bliss and will be bereft of learning and strength. 


140. If Vyaya’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the native will always gain, will speak affably, 
will enjoy a medium span of life and be endowed with all good qualities. 


141. If Vyaya’s Lord is in Dharm Bhava, the native will dishonour his elders, be inimical 
even to his friends and be always intent on achieving his own ends. 


142. If Vyaya’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, the native will incur expenditure through royal 
persons and will enjoy only moderate paternal bliss. 


143. If Vyaya Lord is in Labh Bhava, the native will incur losses, be brought up by 
others and will sometimes gain through others. 


144. If Vyaya’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will only face heavy expenditure, will 
not have physical felicity, be irritable and spiteful. 


145-148. Miscellaneous. O Brahmin, those are the effects of Bhava Lords, which are to 
be deduced, considering their strengths and weaknesses. In the case of a Grah, owning 
two Bhavas, the results are to be deducted based on its two lordships. If contrary results 
are thus indicated, the results will be nullified, while results of varied nature will come 
to pass. The Grah will yield full, half, or a quarter of the effects according to its strength 
being full, medium and negligible, respectively. Thus I have told you about the effects, 
due to Bhava Lords in various Bhavas. 


Ch. 25. Effects of Non-Luminous Grahas 


1. Thus I have explained the effects of the seven Grahas, viz. Strya, Candr, Mangal, 
Budh, Guru, Sukr, Sani, Rahu and Ketu. Now I tell you about the effects of non- 
luminous Grahas. 


2. Effects of Dhum in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 13). If Dhum is in Lagn, the native 
will be valiant, endowed with beautiful eyes, stupefied in disposition, unkind, wicked 
and highly short-tempered. 


3. If Dhum is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be sickly, wealthy, devoid of a limb, will 
incur humiliation at royal level, be dull witted and be a eunuch. 


4. Dhum is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be intelligent, very bold, delighted, eloquent 
and be endowed with men and wealth. 


5. If Dhum is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be grieved on account of being given up 
by his female, but will be learned in all Shastras. 


6. If Dhum is in Putr Bhava, the native will have limited progeny, be devoid of wealth, 
be great, will eat anything and be bereft of friends and Mantras. 


7. If Dhum is in Ari Bhava, the native will be strong, will conquer his enemies, be very 
brilliant, famous and free from diseases. 


8. If Dhum is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be penniless, be ever sensuous, skilful in 
going to others’ females and be always devoid of brilliance. 


9. If Dhum is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be bereft of courage, but be enthusiastic, 
be truthful, disagreeable, hardhearted and selfish. 


10. If Dhum is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be endowed sons and fortunes, be rich, 
honourable, kind, religious and well disposed to his relatives. 


11. If Dhum is in Karm Bhava, the native will be endowed with sons and fortunes, be 
delighted, intelligent, happy and truthful. 


12. If Dhum is in Labh Bhava, the native will be endowed with wealth, grains and gold, 
be beautiful, will have knowledge of arts, be modest and be skilful in singing. 


13. If Dhum is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be morally fallen, will indulge in sinful 
acts, be interested in others’ wives, addicted to vices, unkind and crafty. 


14. Effects of Vyatipat in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 25). If Vyatipat (also known in 
short, as Pat) is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be troubled by miseries, be cruel, will 


indulge in destructive acts, be foolish and will be disposed to his relatives. 


15. If Vyatipat is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be morally crooked, be bilious, will 
enjoy pleasures, be unkind, but grateful, be wicked and sinful. 


16. If Vyatipat is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be firm in disposition, be a warrior, be 


liberal, very rich, dear to the king and be head of an Army. 


17. If Vyatipat is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be endowed with relatives etc., but 
not sons and fortunes. 


18. If Vyatipat is in Putr Bhava, the native will be poor, be charming in appearance, will 
have imbalances of phlegm, bile and wind, be hard-hearted and shameless. 


19. If Vyatipat is in Ari Bhava, the native will destroy his enemies, be physically mighty, 
skilful in use of all kinds of weapons and in arts and be peaceful in disposition. 


20. If Vyatipat is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be bereft of wealth, wife and sons, will 
subdue to females, be miserable, sensuous, shameless and friendly to others. 


21. If Vyatipat is in Randhr Bhava, the native will have deformity of eyes, be ugly, 
unfortunate, spiteful to Brahmins and be troubled by disorders of blood. 


22. If Vyatipat is in Dharm Bhava, the native will have many kinds of business and 
many friends; he will be very learned, well disposed to his wife and he will be eloquent. 


23. If Vyatipat is in Karm Bhava, the native will be religious, peaceful, skilful in 
religious acts, very learned and far-sighted. 


24. If Vyatipat is in Labh Bhava, the native will be extremely opulent, be honourable, 
truthful, firm in policy, endowed with many horses and be interested in singing. 


25. If Vyatipat is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be given to anger, associated with 
many activities, disabled, irreligious and hate his own relatives. 


26. Effects of Paridhi (or Parivesh) in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 37). If Paridhi is in 
Tanu Bhava, the native will be learned, truthful, peaceful, rich, endowed with sons, pure, 
charitable and dear to elders. 


27. If Paridhi is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be wealthy, charming, will enjoy 
pleasures, be happy, very religious and be a Lord. 


28. If Paridhi is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be fond of his wife, be very charming, 
pious, well disposed to his men, be a servant and be respectful of his elders. 


29. If Paridhi is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be wonder-struck, helpful to enemies 
as well, kind, endowed with everything and be skilful in singing. 


30. If Paridhi is in Putr Bhava, the native will be affluent, virtuous, splendourous, 
affectionate, religious and dear to his wife. 


31. If Paridhi is in Ari Bhava, the native will be famous and wealthy, be endowed with 
sons and pleasures, be helpful to all and will conquer his enemies. 


32. If Paridhi is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will have limited number of children, be 
devoid of happiness, be of mediocre intelligence, very hard-headed and will have a 
sickly wife. 


33. If Paridhi is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be spiritually disposed, peaceful, 
strong-bodied, firm in decision, religious and gentle. 


34. If Paridhi is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be endowed with sons, be happy, 
brilliant, very affluent, be devoid of excessive passion, be honourable and be happy with 
even a iota. 


35. If Paridhi is in Karm Bhava, the native will be versed in arts, will enjoy pleasures, be 
strong-bodied and be learned in all Shastras. 


6. If Paridhi is in Labh Bhava, the native will enjoy pleasures through women, be 
virtuous, intelligent, dear to his people and will suffer disorders of digestive fire. 


37. If Paridhi is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will always be a spendthrift, be miserable, 
firm and will dishonour elders. 


38. Effects of Chap (Indr Dhanus, or Kodanda, up to Sloka 49). If Chap is in Tanu 
Bhava, the native will be endowed with wealth, grains and gold, be grateful, agreeable 
and devoid of all actions. 


39. If Chap is in Dhan Bhava, the native will speak affably, be very rich, modest, 
learned, charming and religious. 


40. If Chap is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be a miser, be versed in many arts, will 
indulge in thieving, be devoid of some limb and be unfriendly. 


41. If Chap is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be happy, endowed with quadrupeds, 
wealth, grains etc., be honoured by the king and be devoid of sickness. 


42. If Chap is in Putr Bhava, the native will be splendourous, far-sighted, pious, affable 
and will acquire prosperity in all his undertakings. 


43. If Chap is in Ari Bhava, the native will destroy his enemies, be happy, affectionate, 
pure and will achieve plentifulness in all his undertakings. 


44. If Chap is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be wealthy, endowed with all virtues, 
learned in Shastras, religious and agreeable. 


45. If Chap is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be interested in others’ [213] jobs, be 
cruel, interested in others’ wives and have a defective limb. 


46. If Chap is in Dharm Bhava, the native will perform penance, will take to religious 
observations, be highly learned and be famous among men. 


47. If Chap is in Karm Bhava, the native will be endowed with many sons, abundant 
wealth, cows, buffaloes etc. and will be famous among men. 


48. If Chap is in Labh Bhava, the native will gain many treasures, will be free from 
diseases, very fiery in disposition, affectionate to his wife and will have knowledge of 
Mantras and weapons. 


49. If Chap is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be wicked, very honourable, evil in 
disposition, shameless, will go to other’s females and be ever poor. 


50. Effects of Dhwaj (Sikhi, or UpaKetu) in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 61). If Dhwaj 
is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be skilful in all branches of learning, be happy, efficient 
in speech, agreeable and be very affectionate. 


51. If Dhwaj is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be a good and affable speaker, be 
splendourous, will write poetry, be scholarly, honourable, modest and endowed with 
conveyances. 


52. If Dhwaj is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be miserly, cruel acts, thin-bodied, poor 
and will incur severe diseases. 


53. If Dhwaj is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be charming, very virtuous, gentle, 
interested in Vedic Knowledge and be always happy. 


54. If Dhwaj is in Putr Bhava, the native will be happy, will enjoy pleasures, be versed 
in arts, skilled in expedients, intelligent, eloquent and will respect elders. 


55. If Dhwaj is in Ari Bhava, the native will be ominous for material relatives, will win 
over his enemies, be endowed with many relatives, valiant, splendourous and skilful. 


56. If Dhwaj is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be interested in gambling, be sensuous, 
will enjoy pleasures and will befriend prostitutes. 


57. If Dhwaj is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be interested in base acts, be sinful, 
shameless, will blame others, will lack in marital happiness and will take other’s side. 


58. If Dhwaj is in Dharm Bhava, the native will wear badges, be delighted, helpfully 
disposed to all and he will be skilled in religious deeds. 


59. O Brahmin, if Dhwaj is in Karm Bhava, the native will be endowed with happiness 
and fortunes, be fond of females, be charitable and will befriend Brahmins. 


60. If Dhwaj is in Labh Bhava, the native will ever acquire gains, be very religious, 
honourable, affluent, fortunate, valiant and skilled in sacrificial rites. 


61. If Dhwaj is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be interested in sinful acts, be valiant, 
untrustworthy, unkind, interested in others’ females and be short-tempered. 


62. Effects of Gulik in Various Bhavas (up to Sloka 73). If Gulik is in Tanu Bhava, the 
native will be afflicted by diseases, be lustful, sinful, crafty, wicked and very miserable. 


63. If Gulik is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be unsightly in appearance, miserable, 
mean, given to vices, shameless and penniless. 


64. If Gulik is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be charming in appearance, will head a 
village, be fond of virtuous men and be honoured by the king. 


65. If Gulik is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be sickly, devoid of happiness, sinful 
and afflicted due to windy and billious excesses. 


66. If Gulik is in Putr Bhava, the native will not be praise-worthy, be poor, short-lived, 
spiteful, mean, be a eunuch, be subdued by his wife and be a heterodox. 


67. If Gulik is in Ari Bhava, the native will be devoid of enemies, be strong-bodied, 
splendourous, liked by his wife, enthusiastic, very friendly and helpful in disposition. 


68. If Gulik is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will subdue to his spouse, be sinful, will go to 
others’ females, be emaciated, devoid of friendship and will live on his wife’s wealth. 


69. If Gulik is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be troubled by hunger, be miserable, 
cruel, very much short-tempered, very unkind, poor and bereft of good qualities. 


70. If Gulik is in Dharm Bhava, the native will undergo many ordeals, be emaciated, 
will perform evil acts, be very unkind, sluggish and be a talebearer. 


71. If Gulik is in Karm Bhava, the native will be endowed with sons, be happy, will 
enjoy many things, be fond of worshipping gods and fire and will practice meditation 
and religion. 


72. If Gulik is in Labh Bhava, the native will enjoy women of class, be a leader of men, 
be helpful to his relatives, be short stature and be an emperor. 


73. If Gulik is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will indulge in base deeds, be sinful, 
defective-limbed, unfortunate, indolent and will join mean people. 


74. Effects of Pranapad’s Position with reference to Lagn and in Various Bhavas (up to 
Sloka 85). If Pranapad is in Tanu Bhava, the native will be weak, sickly, dumb, lunatic, 


dull witted, defective-limbed, miserable and emaciated. 


75. If Pranapad is in Dhan Bhava, the native will be endowed with abundant grains, 
abundant wealth, abundant attendants, abundant children and be fortunate. 


76. If Pranapad is in Sahaj Bhava, the native will be injurious (or mischievous), proud, 
hard-hearted, very dirty and be devoid of respect for elders. 


77. If Pranapad is in Bandhu Bhava, the native will be happy, friendly, attached to 
females and elders, soft and truthful. 


78. If Pranapad is in Putr Bhava, the native will be happy, will do good acts, be kind and 
very affectionate. 


79. If Pranapad is in Ari Bhava, the native will be subdued by his relatives and enemies, 
be sharp, will have defective digestive fire, be wicked, sickly, affluent and short-lived. 


80. If Pranapad is in Yuvati Bhava, the native will be green-eyed, ever libidinous, fierce 
in appearance, be not worth respect and be ill-disposed. 


81. If Pranapad is in Randhr Bhava, the native will be afflicted by diseases, be troubled 
and will incur misery on account of the king, relatives, servants and sons. 


82. If Pranapad is in Dharm Bhava, the native will be endowed with sons, be very rich, 
fortunate, charming, will serve others and be not wicked, but be skilful. 


83. If Pranapad is in Karm Bhava, the native will be heroic, intelligent, skilful, be an 


expert in carrying out royal orders and will worship gods. 


84 If Pranapad is in Labh Bhava, the native will be famous, virtuous, learned, wealthy, 
fair-complexioned and attached to mother. 


85. If Pranapad is in Vyaya Bhava, the native will be mean, wicked, defective-limbed, 
will hate Brahmins and relatives and suffer from eye diseases, or be one-eyed. 


86-87. O Brahmin, these are the effects for Dhum etc. Before declaring these results, the 
effects of Stirya and other Grahas should be wisely conceived by their positions, 
relations and Drishtis apart from their strength, or weakness. 


Ch. 26. Evaluation of Drishtis of Grahas 


1. O Glorious, it is said, that Drishtis (of Grahas) and their strengths are to be known in 
deciding the effects. How many kinds are these? Please clarify doubts. 


2-5. Drishtis of the Grahas. O Brahmin, I have earlier stated Drishtis, based on Rasis. 
The other kind is between Grahas, which I detail below. 3rd and 10th, 5th and 9th, 4th 
and 8th and lastly 7th. On these places the Drishtis increase gradually in slabs of 
quarters, i.e 4, 2, % and full. The effects will also be proportionate. All Grahas give a 
Drishti to the 7th fully. Sani, Guru and Mangal have special Drishtis, respectively, on the 
3rd and the 10th, the 5th and the 9th and the 4th and the 8th. The ancient preceptors have 
explained these, which ordinary. By subtle mathematical calculations these Drishtis will 
have to be clearly understood, as under. 


6-8. Evaluation of the Drishtis of the Grahas. Deduct the longitude of the Grah (or 
Bhava), that receives a Drishti, from that of the Grah, which gives the Drishti. If the sum 
exceeds six Rasis, deduct the sum again from 10 Rasis. Convert the latter sum into 
degrees and divide by two. The resultant product is Drishti Kona (or aspectual angle). If 
the difference is in excess of 5 Rasis, ignore the Rasis and multiply the degrees etc. by 2, 
which is the value of the Drishti. If the difference is in excess of 4 Rasis, deduct it from 
5 Rasis, and the resultant degees etc. become the Drishti value. If the difference is in 
excess of 3 Rasis, deduct it from 4 Rasis and (increase 30 by) halve the product to get 
the Drishti value. If the difference is above 2 Rasis, ignore the Rasis and add 15 to the 
degrees etc. to get the Drishti value. If it is in excess of one R&si, ignore the Rasis and 
divide the degrees by 2 to get the Drishti value. 


9-10. Special consideration for Sani’s Drishtis. O Brahmin, if Sani is the Grah, that gives 
a Drishti, find out the difference between him and the Grah, that receives the Drishti; if 
the sum is above | Rasi, multiply the degrees etc. by 2 to get the Drishti value. If the 
sum is above nine RAsis, the degrees to elapse be doubled to get the Drishti value. If the 


sum is above 2 Rasis, the degrees etc. be halved and deducted from 60. If the sum 
exceeds 8 Rasis, add to the degrees etc. a figure of 30 to get the Drishti value. In other 
cases, the sums be processed, as explained earlier. 


11. Special consideration for Mangal’s Drishtis. Deduct the longitude of Mangal from 
that of the Grah, that receives the Drishti. If the sum is 3 Rasis & c, or 7 Rasis & c, the 
degrees etc. be reduced from 60. If it is above 2 Rasis, the degrees etc. be increased by 
half of it and superadd 15. If the sum is 6 Rasis, one Rup is the value. 


12. Special consideration for Guru’s Drishtis. Deduct the longitude of Guru from that of 
the Grah, that receives the Drishti from Guru. If the resultant sum is 3 Rasis & c, or 7 
Rasis & c, halve the degrees etc. and increase it by 15. It the sum is 4 Rasis & c, or 8 
Rasis & c, the degrees etc. be subtracted from 60. This will be the Drishti value. The 
sum, being in conformity with others than these, be treated, as stated earlier. 


Ch. 27. Evaluation Of Strengths 


Shad Bal consists of the following: Sthan Bal (positional), Dig Bal (directional), Kaal 
Bal (Temporal), inclusive of Ayan Bal (equinoctial), Chesht Bal (motional), Naisargika 
Bal (natural), Drik Bal (aspectual). These strengths are computed for the seven Grahas 
from Siirya to Sani. The nodes are not considered. 


Sthan Bal comprises of the following considerations: Uchch Bal (exaltation), Sapt 
Vargaj Bal (strength accruing out of positions in Rasi, Hora, Dreshkan, Saptans, Navans, 
Dvadashans and 


Trimshans), OjhayugmaRasians Bal (acquired by placement in odd, or even Rasi and in 
odd, or even Navans), Kendradi Bal (due to placement in Kon, or Panaphara, or 
Apoklima Bhava), Dreshkan Bal (due to placement in first, second, or third decanate of 
a Rasi). 


Kaal Bal comprises of the following subdivisions: Nathonnata Bal (diurnal and 
nocturnal), Paksh Bal (fortnight), Tribhag Bal (due to day/night being made in 3 parts), 
Varsh, Maas, Dina and Hora Bal (Varsh - astrological year, Maas - month, Dina - 
weekday and Hora - planetary hour), Ayan Bal (equinoctial), Yudhdh Bal (due to 
partaking in war between Grahas). 


1-1’4. Sthan Bal (up to Sloka 6). Firstly Uchch Bal. Now about the strengths by classes 
positional, temporal etc. Deduct from the longitude of the Grah its (deep) debilitation 
point. If the sum is less than 6 RAsis, consider it, as it is; if it exceeds 6 Rasis, deduct the 
same from 12 Rasis. The sum so got be converted into degrees etc. and divided by 3, 
which is the Grah’s Uchch Bal in Virupas. 


2-4. Sapt Vargaj Bal. If a Grah is in its Mooltrikon R&si, it gets 45 Virupas, in Svasth 
Rasi 30 Virupas, in Pramudit Rasi 20 Virupas, in Shant Rasi 15 Virupas, in Din Rasi 10 
Virupas, in Duhkhit Rasi 4 Virupas and in Khal Rasi 2 Virupas. Similarly these values 
occur for the other 6 divisional occupations, viz. Hora, Dreshkan, Saptans, Navans, 
Dvadashans and Trimshans. When all these are added together the Grah’s Sapt Vargaj 
Bal emerges. 


4%, OjhayugmaRasians Bal. Each of Sukr and Candr in even Rasis and others in odd 
Rasis acquire a quarter of Rupa. These are applicable to such Navansas also. 


5. Kendradi Bal. A Grah in a Kon gets full strength, while one in Panaphara Bhava gets 
half and the one in Apoklima Bhava gets a quarter, as Kendradi Bal. 


6. Dreshkan Bal. Male, female and hermaphrodite Grahas, respectively, get a quarter 
Rupa according to placements in the first, second and third decanates. 


7-7'/. Dig Bal. Deduct Bandhu Bhava (Nadir) from the longitudes of Stirya and Mangal, 
Yuvati Bhava from that of Guru and Budh, Karm Bhava from that of Sukr and Candr 
and lastly Lagn from that of Sani. If the sum is above 180 degrees, deduct the sum from 
360. The sum arrived in either way be divided by 3, which will be Dig Bal of the Grah. 


8-9. Kaal Bal (up to Sloka 17). Firstly Nathonnata Bal. Find out the difference between 
midnight and the apparent birth time, which is called Unnata. Deduct Unnata from 30 
Ghatis to obtain Nata. Double the Nata in Ghatis, which will indicate identical Nata Bal 
for Candr, Mangal and Sani. Deduct the Nata from 60 to know the Unnata Bal of Sirya, 
Guru and Sukr. Budh, irrespective of day and night, gets full Nathonnata Bal. 


10-11. Paksh Bal. Deduct from Candr’s longitude that of Surya. If the sum exceeds 6 
Rasis, deduct the same from 12. The product so obtained be converted into degrees etc. 
and divided by 3, which will indicate the Paksh Bal of each of the benefic Grahas. The 
Paksh Bal of benefic should be deducted from 60, which will go to each malefic, as 
Paksh Bal. 


12. Tribagh Bal. One Rupa is obtained by Budh in the first 1/3 part of day time, by 
Surya in the second 1/3 part of the day and by Sani in the last 1/3 part of the day. 
Similarly Candr, 


Sukr and Mangal get full Bal in the first, second and last 1/3 parts of the night. Guru gets 
this Bal at all times. 


13. Varsh-Maas-Dina-Hora Bal. 15, 30, 45 and 60 Virupas are in order given to Varsh 


Lord, Maas Lord, Dina Lord and Hora Lord. Naisargika Bal has already been explained. 


The Varsh Lord is the Lord of the day, on which the astrological year of birth starts. To 
calculate this we first need the number of days, past from the beginning of Creation, the 
Ahargan. According to late Rev. Ebenezer Burgess, who translated Strya Siddhanta in 
English, as on January 1, 1860, the number of days, past from the beginning of Creation 
are 714,404,108,573. Divide the number of days, past from the day of Creation till the 
day of birth, by 60. Reject remainder and multiply the quotient by 3. Increase the post- 
multiplied product by 1 and divide by 7. The remainder will indicate the week day, on 
which the astrological year, giving birth to the native, opened. Remainder 1 indicates 
Sunday, 2 Monday and so on. 


Maas Lord. Divide the same Ahargan by 30 and the quotient indicates months, passed 
from Creation to birth. The completed months be multiplied by 2 and increased by 1. 
The latter sum should be divided by 7 and the remainder indicates, on which day the 
birth month began. Continuing with the same case, we divide 65295 by 30. Quotient is 
2176. This sum multiplied by 2 and increased by 1 denotes 4353. Dividing 4353 by 7, 
we get a remainder of 6, denoting Friday. That is, the month of birth began on Friday 
and the Maas Bal goes to Sukr, the Lord of Friday. 


Dina Lord. Though the week day of birth can be known from ephemeris, or perpetual 
calendars, we better adopt the method prescribed, which will confirm, if the Ahargan 
followed is correct. The number of days, as arrived above, indicating Ahargan, be 
divided by 7 and the remainder will indicate the week day of birth. 


Hora Bal. Hora means planetary hour. Each day from sunrise to sunrise is divided into 
24 equal parts of one hour. These Horas are ruled by the 7 Grahas from Siirya to Sani. 
The first Hora of the day is ruled by the Lord of the week day. The 2nd one is ruled by 
the Lord of the 6th week day, counted from the first ruler. The 3rd Hora is ruled by the 
Lord of the 6th week day, counted from the 2nd Hora Lord. Similarly it proceeds in the 
same manner, till the first Hora of the next day is taken over by the Lord of that day 
himself. Whichever Grah rules the birth Hora, gets the Hora Bal. Horas are to be 
calculated for mean local time and not standard time of births. 


14. Naisargika Bal. Divide one Rupa by 7 and multiply the resultant product by | to 7 
separately, which will indicate the Naisargika Bal, due to Sani, Mangal, Budh, Guru, 
Sukr, Candr and Strya, respectively. 


15-17. Ayan Bal. 45, 33 and 12 are the Khandas for calculating Ayan Bal. Add Ayanans 
to the Grah and find out the Bhuja (distance from the nearest equinox). Add the figure, 
corresponding to the Rasi (of the Bhuja) to the Bhuja. The degrees etc. of the Bhuja 

should be multiplied by the figure, corresponding to the highest of the left out Khandas 


and divided by 30. Add the resultant product to the sum, obtained earlier. Convert this to 
Rasi, degrees, minutes and seconds. If Candr and Sani are in Tula, or ahead, add to this 3 
Rasis and, if in Mesh to Kanya, reduce from this 3 Rasis. Similarly it is reverse for 
Sirya, Mangal, Sukr and 


Guru. For Budh 3 RAsis are always additive. The resultant sum in Rasi, degrees and 
minutes be divided by 3 to get the Ayan Bal in Rupas. 


Notes. Ayan Bal can be found out on the following simple formula: Ayan Bal = 
60*(23°27’ + Kranti)/(46°54’) = (23°27’+ Kranti)*1.2793. 


The following points have to be remembered in respect of Krantis. When Candr, or Sani 
have southern Kranti, or, when Siirya, Mangal, Guru, or Sukr have northern Kranti, take 
plus. In a contrary situation in respect of these 6 Grahas, take minus. As far as Budh is 
concerned, it is always plus. Krantis (or declinations) can be ascertained from a standard 
modern ephemeris. 


Surya’s Ayan Bal is again multiplied by 2 whereas for others the product arrived in 
Virupas is considered, as it is. 


18. Motional Strength for Stirya and Candr. Stirya’s Chesht Bal will correspond to his 
Ayan Bal. Candr’s Paksh Bal will itself be her Chesht Bal. 


19. Drik Bal. Reduce one fourth of the Drishti Pinda, if a Grah receives malefic Drishtis 
and add a fourth, if it receives a Drishti from a benefic. Super add the entire Drishti of 
Budh and Guru to get the net strength of a Grah. 


20. War Between Grahas. Should there be a war between the starry Grahas, the 
difference between the Shad Balas of the two should be added to the victor’s Shad Bal 
and deducted from the Shad Bal of the vanquished. 


21-23. Motions of Grahas (Mangal to Sani). Eight kinds of motions are attributed to 
Grahas. These are Vakr (retrogression), Anuvakr (entering the previous Rasi in 
retrograde motion), Vikal (devoid of motion), Mand (somewhat slower motion than 
usual), Mandatar (slower than the previous), Sama (somewhat increasing in motion), 
Char (faster than Sama) and Atichar (entering next Rasi in accelerated motion). The 
strengths, allotted due to such 8 motions are 60, 30, 15, 30, 15, 7.5, 45 and 30. 


24-25. Motional Strength for Mangal etc. Add together the mean and true longitudes of a 
Grah and divide the one by two. Reduce this sum from the Seeghroch (or apogee) of the 
Grah. The resultant product will indicate the Chesht Kendra (or Seeghr Kendra) of the 
Grah from 12 Rasis. The Rasi, degrees and minutes so arrived should be converted into 


degrees, minutes etc. and divided by 3, which will denote the motional strength of the 
Grah. Thus there are six sources of strength, called Sthan Bal, Dig Bal, Kaal Bal, Drik 
Bal, Chesht Bal and Naisargika Bal. 


26-29. Bhava Balas. Thus I explained about the strengths of the Grahas. Deduct Yuvati 
Bhava from the Bhava, if the Bhava happens to be in Kanya, Mithun, Tula, Kumbh, or 
the first half of Dhanu. If Mesh, Vrishabh, Simh, or first half of Makar, or the second 
half of Dhanu happen to be the Bhava, deduct Bandhu Bhava from it. Should the Bhava 
be in Kark, or in Vrischik, deduct from it Lagn. Deduct Karm Bhava from the Bhava, 
happening to fall in Makar second half, or Meen. Convert the product so obtained into 
degrees etc. and divide by 3 to get Bhava Bal. If the balance in the process of deducting 
Nadir, Meridian, Lagn, or Yuvati exceeds 6 RAsis, deduct it again from 12 Rasis, before 
converting into degrees and dividing by 3. The product after division should be 
increased by one fourth, if the Bhava in question receives a benefic Drishti. If the Bhava 
receives a malefic Drishti, one fourth should 


be reduced. If Guru, or Budh give a Drishti to a Bhava, add that Grah’s Drik Bal also. 
And then superadd the strength, acquired by the Lord of that Bhava. This will be the net 
Bhava Bal. 


30-31. Special Rules. The Bhavas, occupied by Guru and Budh will each get an addition 
of 1 Rupa, while each of the Bhavas, occupied by Sani, Mangal and Sirya, suffer 1 
Rupa reduction. 15 Virupas will have to be added to the Bhavas, falling in Seershodaya 
Rasis, if birth happens to be in day time, to the Bhavas, falling in Dual Rasis, if birth 
happens to be in twilight and to the Bhavas, falling in Prishtodaya RAsis, if birth be in 
night time. 


32-33. Shad Bal Requirements. 390, 360, 300, 420, 390, 330 and 300 Virupas are the 
Shad Bal Pindas, needed for Surya etc. to be considered strong. If the strength exceeds 
the above-mentioned values, the Grah is deemed to be very strong. If a Grah has the 
required Shad Bal, it will prove favourable to the native by virtue of its strength. 
However, Sani’s extreme strength will give long life as well as miseries. 


34-36. Guru, Budh and Surya are strong, if each of their Sthan Bal, Dig Bal, Kaal Bal, 
Chesht Bal and Ayan Bal are, respectively, 165, 35, 50, 112 and 30 Virupas. The same 
required for Candr and Sukr are 133, 50, 30, 100 and 40. For Mangal and Sani these are 
96, 30, 40, 67 and 20. 


37-38. Bhava Effects. O Brahmin, thus the various sources of strengths be gathered 
together and effects declared. Whatever Yogas, or effects have been stated with respect 
to a Bhava, will come to pass through the strongest Grah. 


39-40. Eligibility of Issue Fruitful Predictions. O Maitreya, the words of one, who has 
achieved skill in mathematics, one, who has put in industrious efforts in the branch of 
grammar, one, who has knowledge of justice, one, who is intelligent, one, who has 
knowledge of geography, space and time, one, who has conquered his senses, one, who 
is skilfully logical (in estimation) and one, who is favourable to Jyotish, will doubtless 
be truthful. 


Ch. 28. Isht and Kasht Balas 


1. Now I narrate the benefic and malefic tendencies of the Grahas, based on which the 
Dasha effects can be decided. 


2. Exaltation Rays. Deduct the Grah’s debilitation point from its actual position. If the 
sum exceeds 6 Rasis, deduct from 12 Rasis. The said sum should then be increased by 1 
Rasi. The degrees etc. be multiplied by 2, which, when considered along with Rasis, will 
indicate the Uchch Rasmi of the Grah. 


3-4. Chesht Rasmi. Chesht Rasmis are to be calculated from Chesht Kendr similar to 
Uchch Rasmi computations. The Chesht Kendras of Grahas from Mangal to Sani have 
already been explained. Add 3 Rasis to Sayan Surya (i.e. with Ayanans), which will be 
the Chesht Kendr for Strya. The sidereal longitude of Surya should be deducted from 
Candr to get Candr’s Chesht Kendr. If the Chesht Kendr (for any Grah) is in excess of 6 
Rasis, deduct it from 12 Rasis. Add 1 R&si and multiply the degrees etc. by 2, which will 
indicate the Chesht Rasmi of the Grah. 


5. Benefic and Malefic Rays. Add the Uchch Rasmis and Chesht Rasmis together and 
divide by two. The result will be auspicious rays (Subh Rasmis). Deduct from 8 the 
Subh Rasmis to obtain inauspicious rays (Asubh Rasmis). 


6. Isht and Kasht Tendencies. Reduce | from each of Chesht Rasmi and Uchch Rasmi. 
Then multiply the products by 10 and add together. Half of the sum will represent the 
Isht Phala (benefic tendency) of the Grah. Reduce Isht Phala from 60 to obtain the 
Grah’s Kasht Phala (malefic tendency). 


7-9. Isht and Kasht and Sapt Varg Phal. 60, 45, 30, 22, 15, 8, 4, 2 and 0 are the 
Subhankas (Subha Griha Pankthis, benefic points), due to a Grah’s placement, 
respectively, in exaltation, Mooltrikon, own, great friend’s, friend’s, neutral, enemy’s, 
great enemy’s and debilitation Rasi. If Subhanka is deducted from 60, Asubhanka 
(Asubh Pankthi, inauspicious points) will emerge. O Brahmin, in other Vargas these are 
halved. 


10. A Grah is considered auspicious in the first five of the said places. In the sixth place 


it is neutral, i.e. neither good nor bad. And in the other three places it is inauspicious. 


11-12. Nature of Effects, due to Dig Bal etc. The directional strength of a Grah is itself 
representative of the effects, due to the direction; and Kaal Bal itself is indicative of 
effects, due to the day. Whatever quantum of Dig Bal etc. are obtained by a Grah, will be 
the extent of auspicious effects, acquirable on account of that strength. Deducting those 
figures from 60, the extent of inauspiciousness is known. If auspiciousness is more in 
the case of a Grah’s strength, the Dasha and Bhavas, related to that Grah will be 
auspicious. These are converse, if inauspiciousness is predominant. 


13-14. Sapt Varg Phal and Isht and Kasht (Continued). The various strengths (i.e. the 
other 6 Vargas) be multiplied by the respective Grah’s Shad Bal Pinda, which will 
indicate the auspiciousness of the Varg concerned. Auspicious, or inauspicious aspect 
will be by multiplying the Subh, or Asubh Pankthi. Similarly auspicious, or inauspicious 
effects will be known by multiplying the auspicious, or inauspicious strength by the 
respective Pankthi. 


15-20. Effects of a Bhava. The strength of a Bhava and its Lord have already been 
explained. The actual effects will be a combination of Bhava strength and its Lord’s 
strength. If there is a benefic in the Bhava add the same to the auspicious effects and 
deduct from inauspicious effects, which will denote the inauspicious effects. If a malefic 
is in the Bhava, reverse the process, i.e. add inauspicious effects and deduct auspicious 
effects. Similarly Drishtis and Balas. If a Grah is exalted, or with such a dignity, add 
auspicious effects and reduce inauspicious effects. For debilitation etc. it is converse. In 
Ashtak Varg add Bindus (auspicious points) and deduct Karanas (inauspicious points). If 
a Bhava extends to two Rasis, the rectification will be done, as per both the Lords. In 
that case, whichever Rasi has more Bindus, that Rasi will yield more favourable results, 
concerning that Bhava. If both the Rasis have more auspicious Bindus, take the average. 
Thus the auspicious and inauspicious effects of a Bhava be understood. 


Ch. 29. Bhava Padas 


1-3. Method of Bhava Calculation. O Brahmin, I shall now tell you about the Padas 
(Arudhas) for Bhavas and Grahas as well, as laid down by the earlier Maharishis. The 
Pad of Lagn will correspond to the Rasi, arrived at by counting so many Rasis from 
Lagn’s Lord, as he is away 


from Tanu Bhava. Similarly Padas for other Bhavas be known through their Lords. The 
word “Pad” exclusively denotes the Pad for Lagn. 


Names of the 12 Arudhas are Lagn Pad - Arudh of Tanu Bhava, Dhan of Dhan, Vikram 
(Bhratru) of Sahaj, Matru (Sukh) of Bandhu, Mantra (Putr) of Putr, Rog (Satru) of Ani, 


Dar (Kalatr) of Yuvati, Maran of Randhr, Pitru of Dharm Bhava, Karm of Karm, Labh of 
Labh, Vyaya of Vyaya. 


4-5. Special Exceptions. The same Bhava, or the 7th from it does not become its Pad. 
When the Pad falls in the same Bhava, the 10th therefrom be treated, as its Pad. 
Similarly, when the 7th becomes the Pad of a Bhava, the 4th from the original Bhava in 
question be treated, as its Pad. If the ruler of a Bhava be in the 4th from the Bhava, then 
the very Bhava occupied be noted, as the Pad. 


6-7. Padas for Grahas. Note the position of a Grah and see how many Rasis away is its 
own Rasi with reference to its position. Count so many Rasis from the said own Rasi 
and the resultant Rasi will become the Arudh of the Grah. If a Grah owns two Rasis, or, 
if a Rasi is owned by two Grahas; consider the stronger and declare effects accordingly. 


8-11. Pad and Finance (up to Sloka 15). O Brahmin, I now tell you of some effects of 
Grahas, based on Pad. If the 11th from Lagn Pad is occupied, or receives a Drishti from 
a Grah the native will be happy and rich; wealth will come through various means, if a 
benefic is related, as above. A malefic will confer wealth through questionable means. If 
there be both a benefic and a malefic, it will be through both means. If the Grah in 
question be in exaltation, or in own RaAasi etc., there will be plenty of gains and plenty of 
happiness. 


12. O excellent of the Brahmins, if the 12th from Lagn Pad does not receive a Drishti, as 
the 11th from Lagn Pad receives a Drishti from a Grah, then the gains will be 
uninterrupted. 


13-15. O Brahmin, the quantum of gains will correspond to the number of Grahas in, or 
giving a Drishti to the 11th from Lagn Pad. If there is Argala for the said 11th, there will 
be more gains, while a benefic Argala will bring still more gains. If the said benefic, 
causing Argala is in his exaltation R4si, the gains will be still higher. If the said 11th 
receives a Drishti from a benefic from Lagn, the 9th etc., gains will increase in the 
ascending order. In all these cases, the 12th from Pad should simultaneously be free 
from malefic association. A benefic, placed in Lagn, giving a Drishti to the 11th from 
Arudh Lagn will be still beneficial. If the Drishti is from the 9th from Lagn, it will 
confer much more gains. 


16-17. Pad and Financial Losses (up to Sloka 21). If the 12th from Lagn Pad receives a 
Drishti from, or is yuti with both benefics and malefics, there will be abundant earnings, 
but plenty of expenses. The benefic will cause through fair means, malefic through 
unfair means and mixed Grahas through both fair and unfair means. 


18. If the 12th from Lagn Pad is conjunct Sirya, Sukr and Rahu, there will be loss of 


wealth through the king. Candr, giving a Drishti to (the said trio in the said Bhava), will 
specifically cause more such losses. 


19. If Budh is in the 12th from Lagn Pad and is yuti with, or receives a Drishti from a 
benefic, similarly there will be expenses through paternal relatives. A malefic so related 
to the said Budh will cause loss of wealth through disputes. 


20. O Brahmin, if Guru is in the 12th from Lagn Pad, receiving a Drishti from others, 
the expenses will be through taxes and on the person himself. 


21. O Brahmin, if Sani is in the 12th from Lagn Pad along with Mangal and receives a 
Drishti from others, the expenses will be through one’s co-born. 


22. Gainful Sources. Whatever sources of expenses are indicated above with reference to 
the 12th from Lagn Pad, gains through similar sources will occur, if Labh Bhava so 
features with reference to Lagn Pad. 


23. The 7th Bhava from Pad (up to Sloka 27). If Rahu, or Ketu is placed in the 7th from 
Lagn Pad, the native will be troubled by disorders of the stomach, or by fire. 


24. Should there be Ketu in the 7th from Lagn Pad, receiving a Drishti from, or being 
yuti with another malefic, the native will be adventurous, will have (prematurely) grey 
hair and a big male organ. 


25. Should one, two, or all three of Guru, Sukr and Candr be in the 7th from Lagn Pad, 
the native will be very wealthy. 


26. Whether a benefic, or a malefic, if be exalted in the 7th from Lagn Pad, the native 
will be affluent and be famous. 


27. O Brahmin, these Yogas, as narrated by me with reference to the 7th from Lagn Pad, 
should also be considered from the 2nd of Lagn Pad. 


28. Anyone of Budh, Guru and Sukr being exalted in the 2nd from Lagn Pad and being 
with strength will make the subject rich. 


29. The Yogas so far stated by me with reference to Lagn Pad be similarly evaluated 
from Karakans as well. 


30-37. General. If Budh is in the 2nd from Arudh Lagn, the native will Lord over the 
whole country. Sukr in the 2nd from Lagn Pad will make one a poet, or a speaker. If the 
Dar Pad falls in an angle, or in a trine, counted from Lagn Pad, or, if Lagn Pad and Dar 


Pad both have strong Grahas, the native will be rich and be famous in his country. If the 
Dar Pad falls in the 6th/ 8th/12th from Lagn Pad, then the native will be poor. If Lagn 
Pad and the 7th therefrom, or an angle, a trine, an Upachaya therefrom 1s occupied by a 
strong Grah, there will be happiness between the husband and wife. If Lagn Pad and Dar 
Pad are mutually in Kendras, or Konas, there will be amity between the couple. If these 
be in mutually 6th/8th/12th, doubtlessly mutual enmity will crop up. O Brahmin, 
similarly mutual relationship, or gain, or loss through son etc. be known, based on Lagn 
Pad and the relative Bhava Pad. If Lagn Pad and Dar Pad are mutually angular, or 3rd 
and 11th, or in Konas, the native will be a king, ruling the earth. Similar deductions be 
made with reference to mutual positions of Lagn Pad and Dhan Pad. 


Ch. 30. Upa Pad 


1-6. O Brahmin, now I tell you about Upa Pad, the auspiciousness of which will confer 
on the native happiness from progeny, wife etc. The Pad of Lagn, as discussed earlier, is 
of prime importance. Upa Pad is calculated for the Bhava, following the natal Lagn. 
This Upa Pad is 


also called Gaun Pad. O excellent of the Brahmins, if Upa Pad is yuti with, or receives a 
Drishti from a benefic Grah, one will obtain full happiness from progeny and spouse. 
Should the Upa Pad be in a malefic’s Rasi, or receives a Drishti from, or is yuti with a 
malefic, one will become an ascetic and go without a wife. If (in the said circumstances) 
there be a benefic Drishti (on Upa Pad, or the related malefic), or a yuti, deprival of 
spouse will not come to pass. In this case Siirya, being exalted, or in a friendly Rasi, is 
not a malefic. He is a malefic, if in debilitation, or in an enemy’s RAsi. 


Notes. Regarding Upa Pad calculations, there are more than two views on the same 
Sloka of Maharishi Parashar, or an identical Sutra from Jaimini. In this text, the word 
‘Anuchar’ is used, which denotes ‘the Bhava, following the Lagn at birth’. Normally this 
is Vyaya Bhava. However, when we study other commentaries on Jaimini (Chaukhambh 
Hindi edition), we are taught, that it is Vyaya Bhava in the case of an odd Rasi ascending 
and it is Dhan Bhava in the case of an even Rasi ascending. Accordingly the Pad for the 
12th, or the 2nd from Lagn is called Upa Pad. In calculating Upa Pad the rules 
mentioned in verses 4 and 5 of the previous chapter be kept in mind. 


7-12. Effect from the 2nd from Upa Pad. If the 2nd from Upa Pad is a benefic RAasi, or 
receives a Drishti from, or is yuti with a benefic, the same good results (as for wife and 
sons) will come to pass. If there is a Grah in the 2nd from Upa Pad in its debilitation 
Rasi, or debilitation Ans, or is yuti with a debilitated, or malefic Grah, there will be 
destruction of wife. If the said occupant be in its exaltation Rasi, or Navans, or receives 
a Drishti from another Grah, there will be many charming and virtuous wives. Oh 
Brahmin, if Mithun happens to be the 2nd from Upa Pad, then also there will be many 


wives. O excellent of the Brahmins, if the Upa Pad, or the 2nd therefrom be occupied by 
its own Lord, or, if the said Lord is in his other own Bhava, the death of wife will be at 
advanced age. 


13-15. Wife from the 2nd of Upa Pad (up to Sloka 22). If a Grah being constant 
indicator of wife (i.e. the 7th Lord, or Sukr) is in its own Bhava, there will be loss of 
wife only at a later stage. If the Lord of Upa Pad, or the constant significator of wife is 
in exaltation, the wife will be from a noble family. Reverse will be the case, if he is 
debilitated. O Brahmin, if the 2nd from Upa Pad is related to a benefic, the wife will be 
beautiful, fortunate and virtuous. 


16. Should Sani and Rahu be in the 2nd from Upa Pad, the native will lose his wife on 
account of calumny, or through death. 


17. The native’s wife will be troubled by disorder of blood, leucorrhoea (Pradar) etc., if 
Sukr and Ketu are in the 2nd from Upa Pad. 


18. Budh with Ketu in the 2nd from Upa Pad will cause breakage of bones, while Rahu, 
Sani and Surya will cause distress of bones. 


19-22. Budh and Rahu in the 2nd from Upa Pad will give a stout-bodied wife. If the 2nd 
from Upa Pad happens to be one of Budh’s Rasis and is tenanted by Mangal and Sani, 
the wife of the native will suffer from nasal disorders. Similarly a Rasi of Mangal, 
becoming the 2nd from Upa Pad and occupied by Mangal and Sani, will cause nasal 
disorders to one’s wife. Guru and Sani will, if be in the 2nd from Upa Pad, cause 
disorders of ears and/or eyes to the wife. If Budh and Mangal are placed in the 2nd from 
Upa Pad other than their own RAsis, or, if Rahu is with Guru in the 2nd from Upa Pad, 
the native’s wife will suffer from dental disorders. Sani and Rahu together in one of 
Sani’s Rasis, which is the 2nd from Upa Pad, will cause lameness, 


or windy disorders to the native’s wife. These evils will not come to pass, if there 
happens to be a Yuti with, or a Drishti from a benefic (or from another benefic in the 
case of affliction being caused by a benefic himself). 


23-23'4. O Brahmin, all these effects be deduced from the natal Lagn, Lagn Pad, the 7th 
from Upa Pad and the Lords thereof. So say Narada and others. 


25-28. About Sons. If Sani, Candr and Budh are together in the 9th from one of the said 
places (Sloka 23), there will be no son at all, while Stirya, Guru and Rahu so placed will 
give a number of sons. Candr so placed will give a son, while a mixture of Grahas will 
delay the obtainment of a son. The son, caused by the Yuti of Strya, Guru and Rahu, 
will be strong, valorous, greatly successful and will destroy enemies. If Mangal and Sani 


are in the said 9th, there will be no son, or a son will be obtained by adoption, or 
brother’s son will come in adoption. In all these cases odd RAasis will yield many sons, 
while even RAsis will cause only a few. 


29-30. Many Sons and Many Daughters. O Brahmin, if Simh happens to be Upa Pad and 
receives a Drishti from Candr, there will be a limited number of children. Similarly 
Kanya will cause many daughters. 


31. Co-born form Lagn Pad (up to Sloka 36). Rahu and Sani in the 3rd, or the 11th from 
Lagn Pad will destroy the co-born of the native. Rahu and Sani in the 11th will indicate 
the destruction of elder brothers and/or sisters and in the 3rd younger ones. 


32. If Sukr is in the 3rd, or the 11th from Lagn Pad, there would have been an abortion 
to the mother earlier. Same is the effect, if Sukr is in the 8th from natal Lagn, or from 
Lagn Pad. 


33-36. These are the effects, o Brahmin, as stated by Maharishis for the 3rd and the 11th 
from Lagn Pad. Should Candr, Guru, Budh and Mangal be in the 3rd, or the 11th from 
Lagn Pad, there will be many valorous co-born. Should Sani and Mangal be in the 3rd, 
or the 11th from Lagn Pad, or give Drishtis thereto, younger and elder co-born will, 
respectively, be destroyed. If Sani is alone in one of the said Bhavas, the native will be 
spared, while the co-born will die. Ketu in the 3rd, or the 11th will give abundant 
happiness from one’s sisters. 


37. Other Matters from Lagn Pad (up to Sloka 43). If the 6th from Lagn Pad is occupied 
by a malefic and is bereft of a Yuti with, or a Drishti from a benefic, the native will be a 
thief. 


38. If Rahu is in the 7th, or the 12th from Lagn Pad, or gives a Drishti to one of the said 
Bhavas, the native will be endowed with spiritual knowledge and be very fortunate. 


39. If Budh is in Lagn Pad, the native will Lord over a whole country, while Guru will 
make him a knower of all things. Sukr in this context denotes a poet/speaker (also see 
Ch. 29, verse 30). 


40. O excellent of the Brahmins, if benefics occupy the 2nd from Upa Pad, or from Lagn 
Pad, the native will be endowed with all kinds of wealth and be intelligent. 


41. One will surely become a thief, if the Lord of the 2nd from Upa Pad is in Dhan 
Bhava and is there yuti with a malefic Grah. 


42-43. O Brahmin, if Rahu is in the 2nd from the Lord of the 7th, counted from Upa 


Pad, the native will have long and projected teeth. Ketu in the 2nd from the Lord of the 
7th, counted from Upa Pad, will cause stammering and Sani in the 2nd from the Lord of 
the 7th, counted from Upa Pad, will make one look ugly. Mixed will be the effects, if 
there are mixed Grahas. 


Ch. 31. Argala, or Intervention from Grahas 


1. O Maharishi Parashar, you have told of auspicious effects, related to Argala. Kindly 
narrate its conditions and effects. 


2-9. Formation of Argala. Maitreya, I explain below Argala to know the definite effects 
of Bhavas and Grahas. Grahas in the 4th, 2nd and the 11th cause Argalas, while 
obstructors of the Argala will be those in the 10th, 12th and 3rd from a Bhava, or a Grah. 
If the Argala causing Grah is stronger than the obstructing one, the former will prevail. 
Or, if the number of Argalas are more than the obstructing Grahas, then also the Argala 
will prevail. If there are 3, or more malefics in the 3rd they will cause Vipreet Argala 
(more effective intervention), which will also be harmless and be very favourable. The 
Sth is also an Argala place, while the Grah in the 9th will counteract such Argala. As 
Rahu and Ketu have retrograde motions, the Argalas and obstructions be also counted 
accordingly in a reverse manner. Maharishis say, that the Argala, caused by one Grah, 
will yield limited effect, by two medium and by more than two, excellent effects. 
Argalas should be counted from a RAsi, or a Grah, as the case may be. The Argala, 
which is unobstructed will be fruitful, while the one duly obstructed will go astray. The 
Argala effects will be derived in the Dasha periods of the Rasi, or Grah concerned. 


Notes. “Argala’ in Sanskrit is figuratively used to denote an impediment, or obstruction. 
Some suggest, that the Argala obstruction places are countable from the Argala place 
instead of from the original place, or Grah. This is not logical and a glance into Gochar 
Vedha (obstructions during transits) will confirm our findings. 


10. Special. The Argala, caused by placement of a Grah in the first one fourth part of the 
Rasi, is countered by another, placed in the 4th quarter of the respective obstructive 
Rasi. Similarly 2nd quarter’s Argala is eliminated by the 3rd quarter placement of 
another Grah. 


Notes. If the Argala causing Grah and the obstructing Grah are in the respective quarters, 
the obstruction will come to pass. Otherwise not. 


11-17. Argala Effects. Should there be Argala for the Arudh Pad, for the natal Lagn and 
for the 7th from both, the native will be famous and fortunate. A malefic, or a benefic, 
causing unobstructed Argala, giving a Drishti to Lagn will make one famous. Similarly a 
malefic, or a benefic, causing unobstructed Argala, giving a Drishti to Dhan Bhava 


denotes acquisition of wealth and grains, to Sahaj Bhava happiness from co-born, to 
Bandhu Bhava residences, quadrupeds and relatives, to Putr Bhava sons, grand sons and 
intelligence, to Ari Bhava fear from enemies, to Yuvati Bhava abundant wealth and 
marital happiness, to Randhr Bhava difficulties, to Dharm Bhava fortunes, to Karm 
Bhava royal honour, to Labh Bhava gains and to Vyaya Bhava expenses. The Argala by 
benefics will give various kinds of happiness, while benefic effects will be meddling 
with malefic Argalas. Argala by both benefics and malefics will yield results. 


Notes. 1. Argala can be caused by a benefic, which is known, as Subh Argala. This 
Argala can be from a malefic also, so that the benefic, causing Argala, stalls the malefic 
role. If the 


benefic’s Argala is obstructed by another, then the benefic will become ineffective in 
Argala and the first-mentioned malefic will operate freely. 


2. Argala can be by a malefic with reference to a benefic, so that the native does not 
enjoy good effects, due to the benefic. This is Pap (malefic) Argala. If the Argala is 
eliminated by a benefic, or a malefic, then the first mentioned benefic will be at liberty 
to act, according to his own disposition. 


18. Should there be (unobstructed) Argala for Lagn, Putr and Dharm Bhava, the native 
will doubtlessly become a king and fortunate. 


Ch. 32. Karakatwas of the Grahas 


1-2. I now detail below Atma Karak etc., obtainable from among the 7 Grahas, viz. 
Sirya to Sani. Some say, that Rahu will become a Karak, when there is a state of 
similarity in terms of longitude between (two) Grahas. Yet some say, that the 8 Grahas, 
including Rahu, will have to be considered irrespective of such a state. 


3-8. Atma Karak Defined. Among the Grahas from Surya etc. whichever has traversed 
maximum number of degrees in a particular Rasi is called Atma Karak. If the degrees 
are identical, then the one with more minutes of arc and, if the minutes are also identical, 
then the one with higher seconds of arc, have to be considered. In that case these three 
are called Anthya Karak, Madhya Karak and Upakheta. In the case of Rahu deduct his 
longitude in that particular Rasi from 30. The Karakas will have to be decided, as above 
and, as per further rules given below. Out of these Karakas, Atma Karak is the most 
important and has a prime say on the native, just as the king is the most famous among 
the men of his country and is the head of all affairs and is entitled to arrest and release 
men. 


9-12. Importance of Atma Karak. O Brahmin, as the minister cannot go against the king, 


the other Karakas, viz. Putr Karak, Amatya Karak etc. cannot predominate over Atma 
Karak in the affairs of the native. If the Atma Karak is adverse, other Karakas cannot 
give their benefic effects. Similarly, if Atma Karak is favourable, other Karakas cannot 
predominate with their malefic influences. 


13-17. Other Karakas. The Grah next to Atma Karak in terms of longitude is called 
Amatya Karak. Similarly following one another in terms of longitude are Bhratru Karak, 
Matru Karak, Pitru Karak, Putr Karak, Gnati Karak and Stri Karak. These are Char 
Karakas, or inconstant significators. Some consider Matru Karak and Putr Karak, as 
identical. If two Grahas have the same longitude, both become the same Karak, in which 
case there will be a deficit of one Karak. In that circumstance consider constant 
significator in the context of benefic/malefic influence for the concerned relative. 


18-21. Constant Karakatwas. I narrate below the constant Karakatwas, as related to the 
Grahas. The stronger among Siirya and Sukr indicates the father, while the stronger 
among Candr and Mangal indicates the mother. Mangal denotes sister, brother-in-law, 
younger brother and mother. Budh rules maternal relative, while Guru indicates paternal 
grand father. Husband and sons are, respectively, denoted by Sukr and Sani. From Ketu 
note wife, father, mother, parents-in law and maternal grand father. These are constant 
Karakatwas. 


22-24. Bhavas Related. These constant significances are derivable from the Bhavas, 
counted from the said constant Karakatwas. The 9th from Strya denotes father, the 4th 
from Candr mother, the 3rd from Mangal brothers, the 6th from Budh maternal uncle, 
the 5th from Guru sons, the 7th from Sukr wife and the 8th from Sani death. The learned 
should consider all these and declare related effects accordingly. 


25-30. Yog Karakas. O Brahmin, I make below a passing reference to Yog Karakas 
(mutual co-workers). Grahas become Yog Karakas, if they are in mutual angles identical 
with own RAsis, exaltation Rasis, or friendly Rasis. In Karm Bhava a Grah will be 
significantly so. Grahas simply (not being in friendly, own, or exaltation Rasis) in Lagn, 
Bandhu and Yuvati Bhava do not become such Yog Karakas. Even, if they be placed in 
other Bhavas, but with such dignities, as mentioned, shall become Yog Karakas. With 
such Grahas even a person of mean birth will become a king and be affluent. One born 
of royal scion, then will surely become a king. Thus the effects be declared, considering 
the number of such Grahas and the order the native belongs to. 


31-34. Bhava Significance. I now narrate the significance of the Bhavas. Tanu Bhava 
denotes the soul (self), Dhan family, finance, wife etc., Sahay younger brothers/sisters, 
Putr progeny and Yuvati wife. It is also said, that a Grah in Putr becomes a Karak for 
wife. The Karakatwas of the Bhava in order are Surya, Guru, Mangal, Candr, Guru, 
Mangal, Sukr, Sani, Guru, Budh, Guru and Sani. 


35-37. O excellent of the Brahmins, after knowing the merits of Tanu Bhava etc. the 
good and bad effects can be declared. Ari, Randhr and Vyaya are Trikas, Dusthan, or 
malefic Bhavas. Sahaj, Ari, Karm and Labh are Upachayas. Dhan, Putr, Randhr and 
Labh are Panapharas and Sahaj, Ari, Dharm and Vyaya are Apoklimas. Association with 
Trikas will inflict evils. Kendras and Konas (Putr and Dharm) are auspicious Bhavas, the 
association with which turns even evil into auspiciousness. 


(Also see Ch. 34 for more information) 
Ch. 33. Effects of Karakans 


1. O Brahmin, as laid down by Lord Brahma, I now tell you about the effects of 
Karakans identical with Mesh etc. (Karakans is the Navans, occupied by the Atma Karak 
Grah) 


2-8. Karakans in Various Rasis. If Atma Karak happens to be in Mesh Navans, there will 
be nuisance from rats and cats at all times. A malefic joining will further increase the 
nuisance. Should Atma Karak be in Vrishabh Navans, happiness from quadrupeds will 
result. Should Atma Karak be in Mithun Navans, the native will be afflicted by itch etc. 
Should Atma Karak be in Kark Navans, there will be fear from water etc. If Atma Karak 
happens to be in Simh Navans, fear will be from tiger etc. If Atma Karak happens to be 
in Kanya Navans, itch, corpulence, fire etc. will cause trouble, while, if Atma Karak is in 
Tula Navans, he will make one a trader and skilful in making robes etc. Vrischik 
Navans, holding Atma Karak, will bring troubles from snakes etc. and also affliction to 
mother’s breasts. There will be falls from height and conveyances etc., if it is Dhanu 
Navans, that is occupied by Atma Karak. Makar Navans in this respect denotes gains 
from water dwelling beings and conch, pearl, coral etc. If it is Kumbh Navans, holding 
Atma Karak, the native will construct tanks etc. And in Meen Navans the Atma Karak 
will grant final emancipation. The Drishti of a benefic will remove evils, while that of a 
malefic will cause no good. 


9-11. O Brahmin, if there be only benefics in Karakans and the Navans of Lagn receives 
a Drishti from a benefic, the native will undoubtedly become a king. Should the 
Kendras/Konas from the Karakans be occupied by benefics, devoid of malefic 
association, the native will be endowed with wealth and learning. The combination of 
benefic and malefic influence will in this context yield mixed results. If the Upakheta 
(UpaGrah, vide Ch.32 Sloka 5) is in its exaltation, or own, or friendly Rasi and is devoid 
of a Drishti from a malefic, the native will go to heaven after death. 


12. If the Atma Karak is in the divisions of Candr, Mangal, or Sukr, the native will go to 
others wives. Otherwise the contrary will prevail. 


13-18. Effects of Grahas in the Karakans. O Brahmin, if Surya is in the Karakans, the 
native will be engaged in royal assignments. If the full Candr is there, he will enjoy 
pleasures and be a scholar, more so, if Sukr gives a Drishti to the Karakané. If strong 
Mangal is in Karakans, he will use the weapon spear, will live through fire and be an 
alchemist. Should strong Budh be Karakans, he will be skilful in arts and trading, be 
intelligent and educated. Guru in Karakans denotes one, doing good acts, endowed with 
spiritualism and Vedic learning. One will be endowed with a longevity of 100 years, be 
sensuous and will look after state affairs, if Sukr is in Karakans. Sani in Karakané will 
give such livelihood, as due to the natives family. Rahu in Karakans denotes a thief, a 
bowman, a machinery maker and a doctor, treating poisonous afflictions. If Ketu be in 
Karakans, one will deal in elephants and be a thief. 


19-22. Rahu-Siirya in Karakans. Should Rahu and Strya be in Karakans, there will be 
fear from snakes. If a benefic gives a Drishti to Rahu-Strya in Karakans, there will be 
no fear, but a malefic Drishti will bring death (through serpents). If Rahu and Siirya 
occupy benefic Shad Vargas, being in Karakans, one will be a doctor, treating poisonous 
afflictions, while the Drishti from Mangal on Rahu-Sirya in Karakans denotes, that the 
native will burn either his own house, or that of others. Budh’s Drishti on Rahu-Strya in 
Karakans will not cause the burning of one’s own house, but that of others. If Rahu and 
Surya happen to be in Karakans and are in a malefic’s Rasi, receiving a Drishti from 
Guru, one will burn a house in one’s neighbourhood, while the Drishti of Sukr will not 
cause such an event. 


23-24. Gulik in Karakans. Should the full Candr give a Drishti to Gulik, placed in the 
Karakans, the native will lose his wealth to thieves, or will himself be a thief. If Gulik is 
in Karakans, but does not receive a Drishti from others, one will administer poison to 
others, or will himself die of poisoning. Budh’s Drishti in this context will give large 
testicles. 


25-29. Effects of Drishtis on Ketu in Karakans. If Ketu is in Karakans, receiving a 
Drishti from a malefic, ones ears will be severed, or one will suffer from diseases of the 
ears. Sukr, giving a Drishti to Ketu in Karakans, denotes one, initiated into religious 
order. One will be devoid of strength, if Budh and Sani give a Drishti to Ketu in 
Karakans. If Budh and Sukr give a Drishti to Ketu in Karakans, one will be the son of a 
female slave, or of a female remarried. With Sani’s Drishti on Ketu in Karakané one will 
perform penance, or be a servant, or will be a pseudo-ascetic. Sukr and Sirya together, 
giving a Drishti to Ketu in Karakans, will make one serve the king. Thus, o Brahmin, are 
told briefly the effects of Karakans. 


30-31. Effects of the 2nd from Karakans. If the 2nd from Karakans falls in the divisions 
of Sukr, or Mangal, one will be addicted to others’ wives and, if Sukr, or Mangal give a 


Drishti to the 2nd from Karakans, the tendency will last till death. If Ketu is the 2nd 
from Karakans in a 


division of Sukr, or Mangal, addiction to other’s wives will not prevail, while the 
position of Guru will cause such an evil. Rahu in the 2nd from Karakans will destroy 
wealth. 


32. Effects of the 3rd from Karakans. A malefic in the 3rd from Karakans will make one 
valorous, while a benefic in the 3rd from Karakans will make one timid. 


33-35. Effects of the 4th from Karakans. If the 4th from Karakans happens to be 
occupied by Sukr and Candr, one will own large buildings, like palaces etc. Similar is 
the effect of an exalted Grah in the said 4th. A house, made of stones, is denoted by the 
occupation of the 4th from Karakans by Rahu and Sani. Mangal and Ketu in the 4th 
from Karakans indicate a house, made of bricks, while Guru in the 4th from Karakans 
denotes a house, made of wood. Surya in the 4th from Karakans will give a house of 
grass. If Candr is in the 4th from Karakans, one will have union with his wife in an 
uncompounded house. 


36-40. Effects of the 5th from Karakans. If Rahu and Mangal are in the Sth from 
Karakans, one will suffer from a pulmonary consumption, more so, if Candr gives them 
a Drishti. The Drishti of Mangal on the Sth from Karakans will bring boils, or ulcers, 
Ketu’s Drishti on the 5th from Karakans will cause dysentery and other diseases, caused 
by (impure) water. If Rahu and Gulik happen to be in the 5th from Karakans, there will 
be fear from mean people and poison. Should Budh be in the Sth from Karakans, the 
native will be an ascetic of the highest order, or one, holding staff. Surya in the 5th from 
Karakans denotes one, using a knife. Mangal in the 5th from Karakans denotes one, 
using a spear. Sani denotes a bowman, if Sani is placed in the 5th from Karakans. Rahu 
in the Sth from Karakans denotes a machinist. Ketu in the 5th from Karakans denotes a 
watch maker. Sukr in the Sth from Karakané will make one a poet and an eloquent 
speaker. 


41-45. Effects of Karakans and the Sth from there. If Guru and Candr are in Karakans, or 
the 5th thereof, the native will be an author. Sukr will make one an ordinary writer, 
while Budh will indicate, that the writing skills are less than those of an ordinary writer. 
Should Guru be alone, one will be a knower of everything, be a writer and be versed in 
Vedas and Vedanta philosophy, but not an oratorian, or a grammarian. Mangal denotes a 
logician, Budh a Mimamsaka (follower of Karma Mimansa), Sani indicates, that one is 
dull-witted in the assembly, Siirya denotes, that one is a musician, Candr denotes a 
follower of Sankhya philosophy (of Maharishi Kapila, who enumerated 25 true 
principles with emphasis on final bliss) and indicates, that one is versed in rhetorics and 
singing and Ketu, or Rahu denotes, that one is a Jyotishi. Should Guru be related to the 


positions of Karakans, or the 5th from there, while the Karakans is caused by others than 
him, the effects, as stated, will effectively come to pass. Some say, that the 2nd from 
Karakans should also be similarly considered. 


46. Effects of the 6th from Karakans. If the 6th from Karakans is occupied by a malefic, 
the native will be an agriculturist, while he will be indolent, if a benefic is in the 6th 
from Karakans. The 3rd from Karakans should also be similarly considered. 


47-48. Effects of the 7th from Karakans. If Candr and Guru are in the 7th from 
Karakang, the native will beget a very beautiful wife. Sukr in the 7th form Karakans 
denotes a sensuous wife, while Budh in the 7th from Karakans indicates a wife, versed 
in arts. Surya in the 7th from Karakans will give a wife, who will be confining domestic 
core, while Sani in the 7th from Karakans denotes a wife of a higher age bracket, or a 
pious and/or sick wife. Rahu in the 7th from Karakans will bring a widow in marriage. 


49. Effects of the 8th from Karakans. If a benefic, or the Grah, owning the 8th from 
Karakans, happens to be in the 8th from Karakans, the native will be long-lived, while a 
malefic, placed in the 8th from Karakans, will reduce the life span. Drishti/Yuti of both 
benefics and malefics will yield a medium span of life. 


50-56. Effects of the 9th from Karakans. If the 9th from Karakans receives a Drishti 
from, or is occupied by a benefic, the native will be truthful, devoted to elders and 
attached to his own religion. If a malefic gives a Drishti to, or occupies the 9th from 
Karakans, one will be attached to his religion in boyhood, but will take to falsehood in 
old age. If Sani and Rahu, one will betray his elders and be adverse to ancient learning. 
If Guru and Surya, one will betray his elders and will be disobedient to them. Should 
Mangal and Sukr give a Drishti to, or occupy the 9th from Karakané and are joining in 
six identical Vargas, a female, ill-related to the native, will die. Budh and Candr giving a 
Drishti to, or occupying the 9th from Karakans and joining in six identical Vargas will 
cause imprisonment of the native, due to association with a female not of his own. If 
Guru is alone, related to the 9th from Karakans by Drishti, or by Yuti, the native will be 
addicted to females and be devoted to sensual enjoyments. 


57-60. Effects of the 10th from Karakans. If the 10th from Karakans receives a Drishti 
from, or 1s conjoined by a benefic, the native will have firm riches, be sagacious, strong 
and intelligent. A malefic, giving a Drishti to the 10th from Karakans, or occupying this 
Bhava, will cause harm to his profession and deprive him of paternal bliss. Budh and 
Sukr, giving a Drishti to the 10th from Karakané, or conjoining this Bhava, will confer 
many gains in business and will make him do many great deeds. Siirya and Candr, 
giving a Drishti to the 10th from Karakans, or conjoining this place and receiving a 
Drishti from, or be in Yuti with Guru, the native will acquire a kingdom. 


61-62. Effects of the 11th from Karakans. If the 11th from Karakans receives a Drishti 
from, or is yuti with a benefic, the native will enjoy happiness from co-born apart from 
gaining in every undertaking of his. If a malefic is in the 11th from Karakans, the native 
will gain by questionable means, be famous and valorous. 


63-74. Effects of the 12th from Karakans. If the 12th from Karakans has a benefic, the 
expenses will be on good account, while a malefic in the 12th from Karakans will cause 
bad expenses. If the 12th from Karakans is vacant, then also good effects will follow. If 
there happens to be a benefic Grah in exaltation, or in own Bhava in the 12th from 
Karakans, or, if Ketu is so placed and receives a Drishti from, or is yuti with a benefic, 
one will attain heaven after death. One will attain full enlightenment, if Ketu is in the 
12th identical with Mesh, or Dhanu and receives a Drishti from a benefic. If Ketu is in 
the 12th from Karakans, receiving a Drishti from a malefic, or is there yuti with a 
malefic, one will not attain full enlightenment. If Sirya and Ketu are in the 12th from 
Karakans, the native will worship Lord Shiva. Candr and Ketu denotes a worshiper of 
Gauri. Sukr and Ketu of Lakshmi and a wealthy person. Mangal and Ketu of Lord 
Subramanya. Rahu will make one worship Durga, or some mean deity. Ketu alone 
denotes Subramanya’s, or Ganesh’s worshipper. If Sani is in the 12th from Karakans in a 
malefic’s Rasi, one will worship mean deities. Sukr and Sani in the 12th from Karakans 
in a malefic’s Rasi will also make one worship mean deities. Similar inferences can be 
drawn from the 6th Navans, counted from Amatya Karak’s Navans. 


75-76. Miscellaneous Matters (up to Sloka 84). O Brahmin, if there are two malefics in a 
Kon from Karakans, the native will have knowledge of Mantras and Tantras (formulas 
for the attainment of super-human powers). If a malefic simultaneously gives a Drishti 
to two 


malefics in a Kon from Karakans, the native will use his learnings of Mantras and 
Tantras for malevolent purposes, while a benefic’s Drishti will make him use the 
learnings for public good. 


77-84'. If Candr is in the Karakansg, receiving a Drishti from Sukr, the native will be an 
alchemist and, if receiving a Drishti from Budh the native will be a doctor capable of 
curing all diseases. If Candr is in the 4th from Karakans and receives a Drishti from 
Sukr, the native will be afflicted by white leprosy. If receiving a Drishti from Mangal, 
the native will have blood and bilious disorders and, if receiving a Drishti from Ketu, the 
native will suffer from black leprosy. Should Rahu and Mangal be in the 4th, or 5th from 
Karakans, the native will suffer from pulmonary consumption and, if simultaneously 
there happens to be Candr’s Drishti on the 4th, or the 5th, this affliction will be certain. 
Mangal alone in the 4th, or the 5th will cause ulcers. If Ketu is in the 4th, or the Sth, one 
will suffer from dysentery and afflictions, due to (impure) water. Rahu and Gulik will 
make one a doctor, curing poisonous afflictions, or will cause troubles through poison. 


Should Sani be alone in the 4th, or Sth, the native will be skillful in archery. Ketu lonely 
placed in the 4th, or the 5th will make one a maker of watches etc. Budh lonely placed in 
the 4th, or the Sth will make one an ascetic of the highest order, or an ascetic, holding 
staff. Rahu, Surya and Mangal, respectively, in these places denote a machinist, a knife 
user and a spear, or arrow user. 


85-86. Candr and Guru in the Karakans, or in the 5th therefrom denotes a writer well 
versed in all branches of learning. The grade of writership will comparatively descend in 
the case of Sukr and even further in the case of Budh. 


87-92%. Grahas in the 5th from Karakanég. Should Sukr be in the 5th from Karakané, the 
native will be eloquent and a poet. Guru denotes, that he be an exponent and be all 
knowing, but be unable to speak in an assembly. He will be further a grammarian and a 
scholar in Vedas and Upanishads. Sani will make one ineffective in an assembly, while 
Budh will make him skilful in Karma Mimansa. Mangal in Karakans, or the 5th 
therefrom will make one justice, while Candr in Karakans, or the 5th from there denotes 
a Sankhya Yogi, a rhetoric, or a singer. Siirya in the 5th from Karakans will make one 
learned in Vedanta and music. Ketu will make one a mathematician and skilful in 
Jyotish. Should Guru be related to the said Ketu, these learnings will be by inheritance. 
All these as well apply to 2nd and 3rd from Karakans and to the Karakans itself apart 
from applying to the Sth from Karakans. 


93-93%. Should Ketu be in the 2nd, or 3rd from Karakans, the native will be defective in 
speech, more so, if a malefic gives a Drishti to Ketu, as above. 


94-99. If malefics be in Karakans, Arudh Lagn and the 2nd and 8th from these places, 
there will be Kemadrum Yog, the effects of which will be still severer, if Candr’s Drishti 
happens to be there. The effects, due for these Yogas, will come to pass in the Dasha 
periods of the Rasis, or Grahas concerned. Kemadrum Yog will operate additionally, if 
there are malefics in the 2nd and 8th from the Rasi, whose Dasha will be in currency. 
The results of such Yog will also be inauspicious. If the 2nd and 8th in the Kundali, cast 
for the beginning of a Dasha, have malefics, then also Kemadrum prevails throughout 
the Dasha. 


Ch. 34. Yoga Karakas 


1. O Brahmin, thus I have told you about the effects, derivable through Karakans. Now 
listen to the effects, arising out of lordships of Grahas over Bhavas. 


2-7. Nature due to Lordships of Grahas. Benefics, owning Kendras, will not give benefic 
effects, while malefics, owning Kendras, will not remain inauspicious. The Lord of a 
Kon will give auspicious results. The Lord of Lagn is specially auspicious, as Lagn is a 


Kendr, as well as a Kon. Putr and Dharm Bhava are specially for wealth, while Yuvati 
and Karm Bhava are specially for happiness. Any Grah, owning Sahaj, Ari, or Labh 
Bhava, will give evil effects. The effects, due to the Lords of Vyaya and Randhr Bhava, 
will depend on their association. In each group the significance will be in the ascending 
order. Randhr’s Lord is not auspicious, as he owns the 12th from Dharm Bhava. If the 
Lord of Randhr Bhava simultaneously owns Sahaj, Yuvati, or Labh Bhava, he will prove 
specifically harmful, while his simultaneous ownership of a Kon will bestow auspicious 
effects. The Grah, owning a predominant Bhava, will stall the effects, due to another, 
owning a less significant Bhava and will give his own results. Randhr’s lordship of 
Surya and Candr is not evil. 


8-10. Natural Benefics and Malefics. Guru and Sukr are benefics, while Candr is 
mediocre in benefice and Budh is neutral (a benefic, when associated with a benefic and 
a malefic, when related to a malefic). Malefics are Stirya, Sani and Mangal. Full Candr, 
Budh, Guru and Sukr are stronger in the ascending order. Weak Candr, Siirya, Sani and 
Mangal are stronger (in malefic disposition) in the ascending order. In revealing 
maleficence, due to rulership of Kendras, Candr, Budh, Guru and Sukr are significant in 
the ascending order. 


11-12. Lordships of Kendras and Konas. If there be an exchange between a Lord of a 
Kendr and a Lord of a Kon, or, if a Lord of a Kendr is yuti with a Lord of a Kon ina 
Kendr, or in a Kon, or, if a Lord of a Kon is in a Kendr, or vice versa, or, if there 
happens to be a full Drishti between a Lord of a Kendr and a Lord of a Kon, they cause a 
Yog. One born in such a Yog will become a king and be famous. 


13. If one and the same Grah gets the lordships of a Kon, as well as a Kendr, or, if a 
Grah is in a Kendr, or in a Kon, it will prove specially a Yog Karak. 


14. Lordship of Kendr. It has been said, that a malefic, owning a Kendr, will become 
auspicious, which is true, only when it simultaneously Lords over a Kon and not by 


merely owning a Kendr. 


15. If the Lords of a Kendr, or a Kon own simultaneously an evil Bhava, he does not 
cause a Raj Yog by mere relations stipulated (as per Ch. 34, Slokas 11 and 12). 


16. Rahu and Ketu. Rahu and Ketu give predominantly the effects, as due to their yuti 
with a Bhava Lord, or, as due to the Bhava they occupy. 


17. If Rahu and/or Ketu are in Kendr, receiving a Drishti from, or in association with the 
Lord of a Kon, or of a Kendr, it will become Yog Karak. 


18. O Maharishi Parashar, please narrate, according to the Rasis rising, as to which Grah 


is a Yog Karak and which is inauspicious. 


19-22. Grahas and Mesh Lagn. O Brahmin, listen to these with examples. Even though 
Mangal is the Lord of Randhr Bhava, he will be helpful to auspicious Grahas. Sani, 
Budh and Sukr are malefics. Auspicious are Guru and Siirya. The mere Yuti of Sani with 
Guru will not produce auspicious effects (although they own a Kon and a Kendr). If 
Guru is at the disposal 


of a malefic, he will surely give inauspicious results. Sukr is a direct (independent) 
killer. Sani etc. will also inflict death, if associated with an adverse Grah (Sukr). 


23-24. Grahas and Vrishabh Lagn. Guru, Sukr and Candr are malefics. Sani and Siirya 
are auspicious. Sani will cause Raj Yog. Budh is somewhat inauspicious. The Guru 
group (Guru, Candr and Sukr) and Mangal will inflict death. 


25-26. Grahas and Mithun Lagn. Mangal, Guru and Surya are malefics, while Sukr is the 
only auspicious Grah. The Yuti of Guru with Sani is similar to that for Mesh Lagn. 
Candr is the prime killer, but it is dependant on her association. 


27-28. Grahas and Kark Lagn. Sukr and Budh are malefics, Mangal, Guru and Candr are 
auspicious. Mangal is capable of conferring a full-fledged Yog and giving auspicious 
effects. Sani and Sirya are killers and give effects, according to their associations. 


29-30. Grahas and Simh Lagn. Budh, Sukr and Sani are malefics. Auspicious effects will 
be given by Mangal, Guru and Siirya. Guru’s Yuti with Sukr (though, respectively, Kon 
and Kendr Lords) will not produce auspicious results. Sani and Candr are killers, who 
will give effects, according to their associations. 


31-32. Grahas and Kanya Lagn. Mangal, Guru and Candr are malefics, while Budh and 
Sukr are auspicious. Sukr’s Yuti with Budh will produce Yog. Sukr is a killer as well. 
Surya’s role will depend on his association. 


33-34. Grahas and Tula Lagn. Guru, Surya and Mangal are malefics. Auspicious are 
Sani and Budh. Candr and Budh will cause Raj Yog. Mangal is a killer. Guru and other 
malefics will also acquire a disposition to inflict death. Sukr is neutral. 


35-36. Grahas and Vrischik Lagn. Sukr, Budh and Sani are malefics. Guru and Candr are 
auspicious. Surya, as well as Candr are Yog Karakas. Mangal is neutral. Sukr and other 
malefics acquire the quality of causing death. 


37-38. Grahas and Dhanu Lagn. Only Sukr is inauspicious. Mangal and Surya are 
auspicious. Surya and Budh are capable of conferring a Yog. Sani is a killer, Guru is 


neutral. Sukr acquires killing powers. 


39-40. Grahas and Makar Lagn. Mangal, Guru and Candr are malefics, Sukr and Budh 
are auspicious. Sani will not be a killer on his own. Mangal and other malefics will 
inflict death. Strya is neutral. Only Sukr is capable of causing a superior Yog. 


41-42. Grahas and Kumbh Lagn. Guru, Candr and Mangal are malefics, while Sukr and 
Sani are auspicious. Sukr is the only Grah, that causes Raj Yog. Guru, Siirya and Mangal 
are killers. Budh gives meddling effects. 


43-44, Grahas and Meen Bhava. Sani, Sukr, Stirya and Budh are malefics. Mangal and 
Candr are auspicious. Mangal and Guru will cause a Yog. Though Mangal is a killer, he 
will not kill the native (independently). Sani and Budh are killers. 


45-46. General. Thus the auspicious and inauspicious effects, derivable through the 
Grahas, due to their lordship, according to the rising Rasi, have to be estimated. Apart 
the effects, due to Nabhash Yogas etc., should also be known, which I narrate, as under. 


Ch. 35. Nabhash Yogas 


1-2. O excellent of the Brahmins, explained below are 32 Nabhash Yogas, which have a 
total of 1800 different varieties. These consist of 3 Asraya Yogas, 2 Dala Yogas, 20 
Akriti Yogas and 7 Sankhya Yogas. 


3-6. Names of Nabhash Yogas. The 3 Asraya Yogas are Rajju, Musala and Nala Yogas. 
The 2 Dala Yogas are Maal and Sarpa. The 20 Akriti Yogas are Gada, Sakat, Shringatak, 
Vihag, Hal, Vajr, Kamal, Vapi, Yup, Shar, Shakti, Danda, Nisk, Koot, Chatr, Dhanushi 
(Chap), Ardh, Candr, Chakr and Samudr Yogas. The 7 Sankhya Yogas are Vallaki, 
Daam, Paash, Kedara, Sool, Yuga and Gola Yogas. Thus these are 32 in total. 


7. Rajju, Musala and Nala Yogas. All the Grahas in Movable Rasis cause Rajju Yog. All 
the Grahas in Fixed Rasis cause Musala Yog. All the Grahas in Dual Rasis cause Nala 
Yog. 


8. Maal and Sarpa Yogas. If 3 Kendras are occupied by benefics, Maal Yog is produced, 
while malefics so placed will cause Bhujang, or Sarpa Yog. These Yogas, respectively, 
produce benefic and malefic results. 


9-11. Gada, Sakat, Vihag, Shringatak, Hal, Vajr and Yav Yogas. If all the Grahas occupy 
two successive Kendras, Gada Yog is formed. Sakat Yog occurs, when all the Grahas are 
disposed in Lagn and Yuvati Bhava. If all confine to Bandhu and Karm Bhava, then 
Vihag Yog occurs. All Grahas in Lagn, Putr and Dharm Bhava cause Shringatak Yog, 


while all Grahas in Dhan, Ari and Karm Bhava, or in Sahaj, Yuvati and Labh Bhava, or 
in Bandhu, Randhr and Vyaya Bhava cause Hal Yog. Vajr Yog is caused by all benefics 
in Lagn and Yuvati Bhava, or all malefics in Bandhu and Karm Bhava. In a contrary 
situation, i.e. all benefics in Bandhu and Karm Bhava, or all malefics in Lagn and Yuvati 
Bhava, Yav Yog is generated. 


12. Kamal and Vapi Yogas. If all the Grahas are in the 4 Kendras, Kamal Yog is 
produced. If all of them happen to be in all the Apoklimas, or in all the Panapharas, Vapi 
Yog occurs. 


13. Yup, Shar, Shakti and Danda Yogas. If all the 7 Grahas are in the 4 Bhavas, 
commencing from Lagn, they cause Yup Yog, if from Bandhu, Shar Yog occurs, if from 
Yuvati, Shakti Yog occurs and, if from Karm, Danda Yog is formed. 


14. Nauka, Koot, Chatr and Chap Yogas. If all the Grahas occupy the seven Bhavas from 
Lagn, Nauka Yog occurs, if from Bandhu, Koot Yog is formed, if from Yuvati, Chatr Yog 
occurs and, if from Karm, Chap Yog occurs. Here again the Grahas should occupy seven 
continuous Bhavas. 


Quoted from Saravali. If the seven Grahas occupy continuously seven Bhavas, 
commencing from a Bhava, which is not angular to the Lagna, the Yoga produced is 
known, as Ardh Candra Yoga. 


15. Chakr and Samudr Yogas. If all the Grahas occupy six alternative Rasis, 
commencing from Lagn, Chakr Yog is formed. Samudr Yog is produced, if all Grahas 
occupy six alternative Rasis, commencing from Dhan Bhava. 


16-17. Sankhya Yogas. If all Grahas are in one Rasi, Gola Yog is formed, if in 2, Yuga 
Yog is formed, if in 3, Sool Yog occurs, if in 4, Kedara Yog occurs, if in 5, Paash Yog is 
formed, if in 6, Daam Yog occurs and, if in 7, Veena Yog is produced. None of these 
seven Yogas will be operable, if another Nabhash Yog is derivable. 


18. Effects of Nabhash Yogas (up to Sloka 50). Rajju Yog. One born in Rajju Yog will be 
fond of wandering, be charming, will earn in foreign countries. He will be cruel and 
mischievous. 


19. Musala Yog. One born in Musala Yog will be endowed with honour, wisdom, wealth 
etc., be dear to king, famous, will have many sons and be firm in disposition. 


20. Nala Yog. One born in Nala Yog will have uneven physique, be interested in 
accumulating money, very skilful, helpful to relatives and charming. 


21. Maal Yog. One born in Maal Yog will be ever happy, endowed with conveyances, 
robes, food and pleasures, be splendourous and endowed with many females. 


22. Sarpa Yog. One born in Sarpa Yog will be crooked, cruel, poor, miserable and will 
depend on others for food and drinks. 


23. Gada Yog. One born in Gada Yog will always make efforts to earn wealth, will 
perform sacrificial rites, be skilful in Shastras and songs and endowed with wealth, gold 
and precious stones. 


24. Sakat Yog. One born in Sakat Yog will be afflicted by diseases, will have diseased, 
or ugly nails, be foolish, will live by pulling carts, be poor and devoid of friends and 
relatives. 


25. Vihag Yog. One born in Vihag Yog will be fond of roaming, be a messenger, will live 
by sexual dealings, be shameless and interested in quarrels. 


26. Shringatak Yog. One born in Shringatak Yog will be fond of quarrels and battles, be 
happy, dear to king, endowed with an auspicious wife, be rich and will hate women. 


27. Hal Yog. One born in Hal Yog will eat a lot, will be very poor, will be miserable, 
agitated, given up by friends and relatives. He will be a servant. 


28. Vajr Yog. One born in Vajr Yog will be happy in the beginning and at the end of life, 
be valorous, charming, devoid of desires and fortunes and be inimical. 


29. Yav Yog. One born in Yav Yog will observe fasts and other religious rules, will do 
auspicious acts, will obtain happiness, wealth and sons in his mid-life. He will be 
charitable and firm. 


30. Kamal Yog. One born in Kamal Yog will be rich and virtuous, be long lived, very 
famous and pure. He will perform hundreds of auspicious acts and he will be a king. 


31. Vapi Yog. One born in Vapi Yog will be capable of accumulating wealth, be endowed 
with lasting wealth and happiness and sons, be free from eye afflictions and will be a 
king. 


32. Yup Yog. One born in Yup Yog will have spiritual knowledge and will be interested 
in sacrificial rites. He will be endowed with a wife, be strong, interested in fasts and 


other religious observations and be distinguished. 


33. Shar Yog. One born in Shar Yog will make arrows, be head of a prison, will earn 


through animals, will eat meat, will indulge in torture and mean handiworks. 


34. Shakti Yog. One born in Shakti Yog will be bereft of wealth, be unsuccessful, 
miserable, mean, lazy, long lived, interested and skilful in war, firm and auspicious. 


35. Danda Yog. One born in Danda Yog will lose sons and wife, will be indigent, 
unkind, away from his men and will serve mean people. 


36. Nauka Yog. One born in Nauka Yog will derive his livelihood through water, be 
wealthy, famous, wicked, wretched, dirty and miserly. 


37. Koot Yog. One born in Koot Yog will be a liar, will head a jail, be poor, crafty, cruel 
and will live in hills and fortresses. 


38. Chatr Yog. One born in Chatr Yog will help his own men, be kind, dear to many 
kings, very intelligent, happy at the beginning and end of his life and be long-lived. 


39. Chap Yog. One born in Chap Yog will be liar, will protect secrets, be a thief, be fond 
of wandering, forests, be devoid of luck and be happy in the middle of the life. 


40. Ardh Candr Yog. One born in Ardh Candr Yog will lead an Army, will possess a 
splendourous body, be dear to king, be strong and endowed with gems, gold and 
ornaments. 


41. Chakr Yog. One born in Chakr Yog will be an emperor, at whose feet will be the 
prostrating kings, heads, adoring gem studded diadems. 


42. Samudr Yog. One born in Samudr Yog will have many precious stones and abundant 
wealth, be endowed with pleasures, dear to people, will have firm wealth and be well 
disposed. 


43. Veena Yog. One born in Veena Yog will be fond of songs, dance and musical 
instruments, be skilful, happy, wealthy and be a leader of men. 


44. Daamini Yog. One born in Daamini Yog will be helpful to others, will have 
righteously earned wealth, be very affluent, famous, will have many sons and gems, be 
courageous and red-lettered. 


45. Paash Yog. One born in Paash Yog will be liable to be imprisoned, be skilful in 
work, be deceiving in disposition, will talk much, be bereft of good qualities and will 
have many servants. 


46. Kedara Yog. One born in Kedara Yog will be useful to many, be an agriculturist, be 
truthful, happy, fickle-minded and wealthy. 


47. Sool Yog. One born in Sool Yog will be sharp, indolent, bereft of wealth, be tortuous, 
prohibited, valiant and famous through war. 


48. Yuga Yog. One born in Yuga Yog will be heretic, be devoid of wealth, be discarded 
by others and be devoid of sons, mother and virtues. 


49. Gola Yog. One born in Gola Yog will be strong, be devoid of wealth, learning and 
intelligence, be dirty, sorrowful and miserable. 


50. Ancestors say, that the results, due to said (Nabhash) Yogas, will be felt throughout 
in all the Dasha periods. 


Ch. 36. Many Other Yogas 


1-2. Benefic and Malefic Yogas. If there be a benefic in Lagn, Subh Yog is produced, 
while a malefic in Lagn causes Asubh Yog. Benefics in both Vyaya and Dhan Bhava 
cause Subh Yog. Malefics in both Vyaya and Dhan Bhava cause Asubh Yog. One born in 
Subh Yog will be eloquent, charming and virtuous, while his counterpart will be 
sensuous, will do sinful acts and will enjoy (swallow) others’ wealth. 


3-4. Gaj Kesari Yog. Should Guru be in a Kendr from Lagn, or from Candr and be yuti 
with, or receiving a Drishti from benefic, avoiding at the same time debilitation, 
combustion and inimical Rasi, Gaj Kesari Yog is caused. One born in Gaj Kesari Yog 
will be splendourous, wealthy, intelligent, endowed with many laudable virtues and will 
please the king. 


5-6. Amal Yog. If there be exclusively a benefic in the 10th from Lagn, or Candr, Amal 
Yog exists. Amal Yog will confer fame, lasting till Candr and stars exist and will make 
the native honoured by the king, enjoy abundant pleasures, charitable, fond of relatives, 
helpful to others, pious and virtuous. 


7-8. Parvat Yog. Benefics in Kendras will produce Parvat Yog, as Yuvati and Randhr 
Bhava are vacant, or are occupied by only benefics. One born in Parvat Yog will be 
wealthy, eloquent, charitable, learned in Shastras, fond of mirth, famous, splendourous 
and be the leader of a city. 


9-10. Kahal Yog. Should Bandhu’s Lord and Guru be in mutual Kendras, while Lagn’s 
Lord is strong, Kahal Yog occurs. Alternatively Bandhu’s Lord, being in his own, or 
exaltation Rasi, should be yuti with Karm’s Lord. In effect the native will be energetic, 


adventurous, charming, endowed with a complete Army, consisting of chariots, 
elephants, horses and infantry and he will Lord over a few villages. 


11-12. Chamar Yog. If Lagn’s Lord is exalted in a Kendr and receives a Drishti from 
Guru, Chamar Yog is formed. This Yog also occurs, if two benefics are in Lagn, or 
Dharm, or Karm, or Yuvati Bhava. The effects of Chamar Yog are: the native will be a 
king, or honoured by the king, long lived, scholarly, eloquent and versed in all arts. 


13-14. Shankh Yog. If Lagn’s Lord is strong, while the Lords of Putr and Ari Bhava are 
in mutual Kendras, then what is known, as Shankh Yog, is produced. Alternatively, if 
Lagn’s Lord along with Karm’s Lord is in a Movable Rasi, while Dharm’s Lord is 
strong, Shankh Yog is obtained. One born with Shankh Yog will be endowed with 
wealth, spouse and sons. He will be kindly disposed, propitious, intelligent, meritorious 
and long-lived. 


15-16. Bhairi Yog. If Vyaya, Tanu, Dhan and Yuvati Bhava are occupied, as Dharm’s 
Lord is strong, the native obtains Bhairi Yog. Again another kind of Bhairi Yog is 
formed, if Sukr, Guru and Lagn’s Lord are in a Kendr, while Dharm’s Lord is strong. 
The results of Bhairi Yog are: the native will be endowed with wealth, wife and sons. He 
will be a king, be famous, virtuous and endowed with good behaviour, happiness and 
pleasures. 


17. Mridang Yog. If Lagn’s Lord is strong and others occupy Kendras, Konas, own 
Bhavas, or exaltation Rasis, Mridang Yog is formed. The native concerned will be a 
king, or equal to a king and be happy. 


18. Shrinath Yog. If Yuvati’s Lord is in Karm Bhava, while Karm’s Lord is exalted and 
yuti with Dharm’s Lord, Shrinath Yog takes place. The native with Shrinath Yog will be 
equal to Lord Devendra (god of gods). 


19-20. Sharad Yog. Should Karm’s Lord be in Putr Bhava, while Budh is in a Kendr, as 
Surya with strength is in Simh, Sharad Yog is formed. This will again be obtained, if 
Guru, or Budh is in a Kon to Candr, while Mangal is in Labh Bhava. One born in either 
kind of Yog will obtain wealth, spouse and sons, be happy, scholarly, dear to the king, 
pious and virtuous. 


21-22. Matsya Yog. Benefics in Dharm and Tanu Bhava, mixed Grahas in Putr Bhava 
and malefics in Bandhu and Randhr Bhava: this array of Grahas at birth will produce 
Matsya Yog. In effect the native will be a Jyotishi, be a synonym of kindness, be 
virtuous, strong, beautiful, famous, learned and pious. 


23-24. Kurm Yog. If Putr, Ari and Yuvati Bhava are occupied by benefic Grahas 


identical with own Bhava, or exaltation, or friendly Rasi, while malefics are in Sahaj, 
Labh and Tanu Bhava, in own Bhava, or in exaltation, Kurm Yog is formed. The results 
of Kurm Yog are: the native will be a king. be courageous, virtuous, famous, helpful, 
happy. He will be a leader of men. 


25-26. Khadg Yog. Should there be an exchange of Rasis between the Lords of Dhan 
and Dharm Bhava, as Lagn’s Lord is in a Kendr, or in a Kon, Khadg Yog is obtained. 
One with Khadg Yog will be endowed with wealth, fortunes and happiness, be learned in 
Shastras, be intelligent, mighty, grateful and skilful. 


27-28. Lakshmi Yog. If Dharm’s Lord is in a Kendr identical with his Mooltrikon RAsi, 
or own Ra&si, or in exaltation, while Lagn’s Lord is endowed with strength, Lakshmi Yog 
occurs. The native with Lakshmi Yog will be charming, virtuous, kingly in status, 
endowed with many sons and abundant wealth. He will be famous and of high moral 
merits. 


29-30. Kusum Yog. Sukr in a Kendr, Candr in a Kon along with a benefic and Sani in 
Karm Bhava: these Grahas thus cause Kusum Yog for one born in a Fixed Rasi 
ascending. Such a native will be a king, or equal to him, be charitable, will enjoy 
pleasures, be happy, prime among his race men, virtuous and red-lettered. 


31-32. Kalanidhi Yog. If Guru is placed in Dhan, or Putr Bhava and receives a Drishti 
from Budh and Sukr, Kalanidhi Yog is caused. In effect the native will be virtuous, 
honoured by the kings, bereft of diseases, be happy, wealthy and learned. 


33-34. Kalpa Drum Yog. Note the following four Grahas: Lagn’s Lord , the dispositor of 
Lagn’s Lord (a), the dispositor of the Grah “a” (b), the Navans dispositor of the Grah 
“b”. If all these are disposed in Kendras and in Konas from Lagn, or are exalted, Kalpa 
Drum Yog exists. One with Kalpa Drum Yog will be endowed with all kinds of wealth, 
be a king, pious, strong, fond of war and merciful. 


35-36. Trimurthi Yogas. Counted from Dhan’s Lord, if benefics occupy the 2nd, 12th 
and 8th, Hari Yog is formed. If the 4th, 9th and 8th with reference to the Rasi, occupied 
by Yuvati’s Lord, are occupied by benefics, Hara Yog is obtainable. Brahma Yog is 
generated, if, counted from Lagn’s Lord, benefics are in the 4th, 10th and 11th Rasis. 
One born in anyone of the said three Yogas will be happy, learned and endowed with 
wealth and sons. 


37. Lagn Adhi Yog. Should benefics be in Yuvati and Randhr Bhava, counted from Lagn 
and be devoid of Yuti with and/or Drishti from malefics, Lagn Adhi Yog is produced, 
making one a great person, learned in Shastras and happy. 


38-39. Effects of Lagn’s Lord’s Division Dignities. Lagn’s Lord in Paryatans will make 
one happy, in Vargottama will give immunity to diseases, in Gopurans will make one 
rich with wealth and grains, in Simhasanans will make one a king, in Paravatans will 
make one a scholar, in Devalokans will make one opulent and endowed with 
conveyances and in Iravatans will make one famous and honoured by kings. 
(Vargottama indicates a Grah, occupying the same R&si and the same Navans) 


Ch. 37. Candr’s Yogas 


1. If Candr with reference to Stirya is in a Kendr, one’s wealth, intelligence and skill will 
be little, if in a Panaphara, will be meddling, if in a Apoklima, will be excellent. 


2-4. In the case of a day birth, if Candr, placed in its own Navans, or in a friendly 
Navans, receives a Drishti from Guru, one will be endowed with wealth and happiness. 
One born at night time will enjoy similar effects, if Candr is in its own Navans, or in a 
friendly Navans, receiving a Drishti from Sukr. In a contrary situation, the Drishti from 
Guru, or from Sukr on Candr will make one go with little wealth, or even without that. 


5. Adhi Yog from Candr. If benefics occupy the 8th, 6th and 7th, counted from Candr, 
Adhi Yog obtains. According to the strength of the participating Grahas, the native 
concerned will be either a king, or a minister, or an Army chief. 


6. Dhan Yog. Should all the (three) benefics be Upachaya, counted from Candr, one will 
be very affluent. With two benefics, placed in the 3rd, the 6th, the 10th and the 11th, one 
will have medium effects in regard to wealth. If a single benefic is there, the wealth will 
be negligible. 


7-10. Sunaph, Anaph and Duradhar. If there is a Grah other than Strya, in the 2nd from 
Candr, Sunaph Yog is formed, if in the 12th from Candr, Anaph Yog is formed and, if in 
the 2nd and 12th from Candr, Duradhar Yog is caused. One with Sunaph Yog will be a 
king, or equal to a king, endowed with intelligence, wealth, fame and self-earned wealth. 
One born in Anaph 


Yog will be a king, be free from diseases, virtuous, famous, charming and happy. One 
born in Duradhar Yog will enjoy pleasures, will be charitable and endowed with wealth, 
conveyances and excellent serving force. 


11-13. Kema Drum Yog. Excluding Sirya, should there be no Grah with Candr, or in the 
2nd and/or 12th from Candr, or in a Kendr from Lagn, Kema Drum Yog is formed. One 
born in Kema Drum Yog will be very much reproached, will be bereft of intelligence, 
learning, reduced to penury and perils. 


Ch. 38. Surya’s Yogas 


1. Vesi, Vosi and Abhayachari Yogas. Barring Candr, if a Grah among Mangal etc. be in 
the 2nd from Stirya, Vesi Yog is formed, if in the 12th from Surya, Vosi Yog is formed 
and if in both the 2nd and the 12th from Strya, Ubhayachari Yog is caused. 


2-3. Effects of Vesi, Vosi and Ubhayachari Yogas. One born in Vesi Yog will be even 
sighted, truthful, long-bodied, indolent, happy and endowed with negligible wealth. One 
born with Vosi Yog will be skilful, charitable and endowed with fame, learning and 
strength. The Ubhayachari native will be a king, or equal to a king and be happy. 


4. Benefics, causing Vesi, Vosi, or Ubhayachari Yogas, will give the above-mentioned 
effects, while malefics will produce contrary effects. 


Ch. 39. Raj Yog 


1-2. O excellent of the Brahmins, I now narrate below the Raj Yogas, making one 
entitled to royal honour. These were told to Parvati by Lord Shiva once upon a time, the 
gist of which is, as follows. 


3-5. Raj Yogas are to be known from the Karakans Lagn and the natal Lagn. On the one 
hand the pair of Atma Karak and Putr Karak should be considered and on the other hand 
the natal Lagn’s Lord and Putr’s Lord should be taken into consideration. The effects, 
due to such association, will be full, or a half, or a quarter, according to their strengths. 


6-7. Maha Raj Yog. Should Lagn’s Lord and Putr’s Lord exchange their RAsis, or, if 
Atma Karak and Putr Karak (Char) are in Lagn, or in Putr Bhava, or in the exaltation 
Rasi, or in own Rasi, or in own Navans, receiving a Drishti from a benefic, Maha Raj 
Yog is produced. The native so born will be famous and happy. 


8. If Lagn’s Lord and Atma Karak are in Tanu, Putr, or Yuvati Bhava, yuti with, or 
receiving a Drishti from a benefic, a Raj Yog is formed. 


9-10. Should there be benefics in the 2nd, the 4th and the 5th, counted either from 
Lagn’s Lord, or from Atma Karak Rasi, one will become a king. Similarly malefics in 
the 3rd and 6th from Lagn’s Lord, or from Atma Karak Rasi will make one a king. 


11. One will be related to royal circles, if Sukr is the Karakané, or in the 5th there from, 
or in Lagn, or in Arudh Lagn, receiving a Drishti from, or yuti with Guru, or Candr. 


12. Even, if a single Grah gives a Drishti to the natal Lagn, or Hora Lagn, or Ghatik 
Lagn, the native will become a king. 


13-14. If the Shad Vargas of Lagn are occupied, or receive a Drishti from one and the 
same Grah, a Raj Yog is doubtlessly formed. Accordingly, if the Drishti is full, half, or 
one fourth, results will be in order full, medium and negligible. 


15. If the 3 Lagnas (natal, Hora and Ghatik) are occupied by Grahas in exaltation, or in 
own Rasi, or, if the natal Lagn, the Dreshkan Lagn and the Navans Lagn have exalted 
Grahas, Raj Yog is formed. 


16. If Candr and a benefic are in the Arudh Lang, as Guru is in the 2nd from the natal 
Lagn and both these places are receiving Drishtis from Grahas in exaltation, or Grahas 
in own Rasi, there will be a Raj Yog. 


17. If Lagn, Dhan and Bandhu Bhava are occupied by benefics, while a malefic is in 
Sahaj Bhava, one will become a king, or equal to a king. 


18. The native will be wealthy, if one among Candr, Guru, Sukr and Budh is exalted in 
Dhan Bhava. 


19. If Ari, Randhr and Sahaj Bhava are occupied by debilitated Grahas, as Lagn’s Lord 
is exalted, or is in own Bhava and gives a Drishti to Lagn, there is a Raj Yog. 


20. Again a Raj Yog is formed, if Ari’s, Randhr’s and Vyaya’s Lords are in fall, or in 
inimical Rasis, or in combustion, as Lagn’s Lord, placed in his own RAsi, or in its 
exaltation Rasi, gives a Drishti to Lagn. 


21. If Karm’s Lord, placed in his own Bhava, or in its exaltation R4si, gives a Drishti to 
Lagn, a Raj Yog is formed. Similar is the case, if benefics are in Kendras. 


22. If the Atma Karak Grah is in a benefic’s Rasi/Navans, the native will be wealthy. If 
there are benefics in Kendras from Karakans Lagn, he will become a king. 


23. If the Arudh Lagn and Dar Pad are in mutual Kendras, or in mutual Sahaj/Labh 
Bhavas, or in mutual Konas, the native will doubtlessly become a king. 


24. If two, or all of Bhava, Hora, Ghatik Lagnas are receiving a Drishti from exalted 
Grahas, a Raj Yog is formed. 


25. If Bhava, Hora and Ghatik Lagnas, their Dreshkanas and Navanias, or the said 
Lagnas and their Navansas, or the said Lagnas and their Dreshkanas receive a Drishti 
from a Grah, a Raj Yog is formed. 


26-27. If Arudh Pad is occupied by an exalted Grah, particularly Candr in exaltation, or 
by Guru and/or Sukr (with, or without exaltation), while there is no Argala by a malefic, 
the native will become a king. If the Arudh Pad is a benefic R&si, containing Candr, 
while Guru is in Dhan Bhava, the same effect will prevail. 


28. Even, if one among Ari’s, Randhr’s and Vyaya’s Lords, being in debilitation, gives a 
Drishti to Lagn, there will be a Raj Yog. 


29-31. The native will become a king, if a Grah, ruling Bandhu, Karm, Dhan, or Labh, 
gives a Drishti to Lagn, while Sukr gives a Drishti to the 11th from Arudh Lagn, as 
Arudh Lagn is occupied by a benefic. The same effect will be obtained, if a debilitated 
Grah gives a Drishti to Lagn and is placed in Ari, or Randhr Bhava. Again similar result 
will prevail, if a debilitated Grah, placed in Sahaj, or Labh Bhava, gives a Drishti to 
Lagn. 


32. I now tell you of the Raj Yogas, based on the Grahas with different dignities and on 
the Drishtis and Yutis of the Grahas. 


33-34. Dharm’s Lord is akin to a minister and more especially Putr’s Lord. If these two 
Grahas mutually give a Drishti, the native will obtain a kingdom. Even, if these two are 
yuti in any Bhava, or, if they happen to be placed in mutually 7th places, one born of 
royal scion will become a king. 


35. The native will attain a kingdom, if Bandhu’s Lord is in Karm Bhava and Karm’s 
Lord is in Bandhu Bhava and, if these Grahas give a Drishti to Putr’s and Dharm’s 
Lords. 


36. If the Lords of Putr, Karm, Bandhu and Lagn are yuti in Dharm Bhava, one will 
become a ruler with fame, spreading over the four directions. 


37. Should the Lord of Bandhu, or of Karm Bhava join either the Putr’s Lord, or 
Dharm’s Lord, the native will obtain a kingdom. 


38. If Putr’s Lord is in Lagn, Bandhu, or Karm Bhava, yuti with Dharm’s Lord, or Lagn 
Lord, the native will become a king. 


39. Should Guru be in his own Rasi identical with Dharm Bhava and yuti with either 
Sukr, or Putr’s Lord, the native will obtain royal status. 


40. Two and a half Ghatis from mid-day, or from mid-night is auspicious time. A birth 
during such an auspicious time will cause one to be a king, or equal to him. 


41. Should Candr and Sukr be mutually in Sahaj and Labh Bhava and receiving Drishtis 
from each other, while they are placed elsewhere, a Raj Yog is obtained. 


42. Should Candr, endowed with strength, be Vargottans and receives a Drishti from 
four, or more Grahas, the native will become a king. 


43. One will become a king, if Lagn in Uttamans receives a Drishti from four, or more 
Grahas, out of which Candr should not be one. 


44. If one, or two, or three Grahas are in exaltation, one of a royal scion will become a 
king, while another will be equal to a king, or be wealthy. 


45. If four, or five Grahas occupy their exaltation Rasis, or Mooltrikon Rasis, even a 
person of base birth will become king. 


46. If six Grahas are exalted, the native will become emperor and will enjoy various 
kinds of royal paraphernalia. 


47. Even, if one among Guru, Sukr and Budh is in exaltation, while a benefic is in a 
Kendr, the native will become a king, or be equal to him. 


48. If all benefics are relegated to Kendras, while malefics are in Sahaj, Ari and Labh 
Bhava, the native, though may be of mean descent, will ascend the throne. 


Ch. 40. Yogas For Royal Association 


1. If Karm’s Lord is yuti with, or receives a Drishti from the dispositor of Amatya 
Karak, or even, if Karm’s Lord is yuti with, or receives a Drishti from Amatya Karak 
himself, the native will be a chief in the king’s court. 


2. If Karm and Labh Bhava are devoid of malefic occupation and devoid of Drishti from 
a malefic, while Labh Bhava receives a Drishti from its own Lord, the native will be a 
chief in the king’s court. 


3. Should Amatya Karak and the dispositor of Atma Karak be together, the native will be 
endowed with great intelligence and will be a king’s minister. (“Karakendr’ is interpreted 
here, as the dispositor of Atma Karak. Similarly “Amatyesa’ means the dispositor of 
Amatya Karak) 


4. If Atma Karak is strong and is with a benefic, or Amatya Karak is in its own Bhava, or 
in exaltation, one will surely become a king’s minister. 


5. There is no doubt in one’s becoming a king’s minister and famous, if Atma Karak is in 
Tanu, or Putr, or Dharm Bhava. 


6. If Atma Karak, or Amatya Karak is placed in a Kendr, or in a Kon, the native will 
beget royal mercy, royal patronage and happiness thereof. 


7. Should malefics be in the 3rd and the 6th from Atma Karak, or from Arudh Lagn, or 
in Sahaj and Ari Bhava, one will become Army chief. 


8. If Atma Karak is in a Kendr, or in a Kon, or in exaltation, or in its own Bhava and 
gives a Drishti to Dharm’s Lord, the native will be a king’s minister. 


9. If the Lord of the Rasi, where Candr is placed becomes Atma Karak and, if this Lord 
is placed in Tanu Bhava along with a benefic, the native will become a king’s minister at 
his advanced age. 


10. Should the Atma Karak be in Putr, Yuvati, Karm, or Dharm Bhava and happen to be 
with a benefic, one will earn wealth through royal patronage. 


11. If the Arudh of Dharm Bhava happens to be itself the Janm Lagn, or, if Atma Karak 
is placed in Dharm Bhava, the native will be associated with royal circles. 


12. One will gain through royal association, if Labh Bhava is occupied by its own Lord 
and is devoid of a Drishti from a malefic. The Atma Karak should at the same time be 
yuti with a benefic. 


13. An exchange of Rasis between Karm’s Lord and Lagn’s Lord will make the native 
associated with the king in a great manner. 


14. If Sukr and Candr are in the 4th from Karakans Lagn, the native will be endowed 
with royal insignia. 


15. Should Lagn’s Lord, or the Atma Karak be yuti with Putr’s Lord and be in a Kendr, 
or in a Kon, the native will be a king, or minister. 


Ch. 41. Combinations for Wealth 


1. Inow tell you of special combinations, giving wealth. One born to these Yogas will 
surely become wealthy. 


2. Yogas for Great Affluence (up to Sloka 8). Should a Rasi of Sukr be Putr Bhava and 
be occupied by Sukr himself, while Mangal is in Labh Bhava, the native will obtain 


great riches. 


3. Should a Rasi of Budh be Putr Bhava and be occupied by Budh himself, as Labh 
Bhava is occupied by Candr, Mangal and Guru, the native will be very affluent. 


4. Should Simh be Putr Bhava and be occupied by Siirya himself, as Sani, Candr and 
Guru are in Labh Bhava, the native will be very affluent. 


5. Should Siirya and Candr be in Labh Bhava, as Sani is in Putr Bhava identical with his 
own Bhava, the native will be very affluent. 


6. Should Guru be in Putr Bhava identical with his own Rasi, as Budh is in Labh Bhava, 
the native will be very affluent. 


7. If a Rasi of Mangal happens to be Putr Bhava with Mangal therein, while Sukr is in 
Labh Bhava, the native will become very affluent. 


8. If Kark happens to be Putr Bhava, containing Candr therein, while Sani is in Labh 
Bhava, the native will become very affluent. 


9. Yogas for Wealth (up to Sloka 15). Should Strya be in Simh identical with Lagn and 
be yuti with, or receiving a Drishti from Mangal and Guru, one will be wealthy. 


10. Should Candr be in Kark identical with Lagn and be yuti with, or receiving a Drishti 
from Budh and Guru, one will be wealthy. 


11. Should Mangal be in Lagn identical with his own Rasi and be yuti with, or receiving 
a Drishti from Budh, Sukr and Sani, the native will be rich. 


12. Should Budh’s Rasi be Lagn with Budh therein and should Budh be yuti with, or 
receiving a Drishti from Sani and Guru, the native will be rich. 


13. Should Guru be in Lagn identical with his own Rasi and be yuti with, or receiving a 
Drishti from Budh and Mangal, the native will be rich. 


14. If Sukr happens to be in Lagn identical with his own Rasi and be yuti with, or 
receiving a Drishti from Sani and Budh, one will be wealthy. 


15. If Sani is in his own Ragi identical with Lagn and receiving a Drishti from, or being 
yuti with Mangal and Guru, the native will be wealthy. 


16. Other Qualified Grahas. Dharm’s Lord and Putr’s Lord are capable of bestowing 


wealth. Similarly Grahas, yuti with Dharm’s Lord and/or Putr’s Lord are capable of 
bestowing wealth. There is no doubt, that these Grahas will give wealth during their 
Dasha periods. 


17. The Yogas, mentioned above (up to Sloka 16) should be delineated after knowing 
favourable, or unfavourable dispositions of the participant Grahas and their strength and 
weakness. 


18-19. Effects of the Divisional Dignities of the Lords of Kendras. If the Lord of a 
Kendr is in Parijatans, the native will be liberal, if in Uttamans, will be highly liberal, if 
in Gopurans, will be endowed with prowess, if in Simhasanans, will be honourable, if in 
Paravatans, will be valorous, if in Devalokans, will be head of an assembly, if in 
Brahmalokans, will be a sage and, if in Iravatans, will be delighted and be celebrated in 
all quarters. 


20-22. Effects of the Divisional Dignities of Putr’s Lord. If Putr’s Lord is in Pariatans, 
the native will take to the branch of learning, befitting his race, if in Uttamans, will have 
excellent learning, if in Gopurans, will recetve world-wide honours, if in Simhasanans, 
will become a minister, if in also Paravatans, will be endowed with Vedic Knowledge, if 
in Devalokans, will be a Karm Yogi (performer of actions, worldly and religious rites), if 
in Brahmalokans, will be devoted to the Lord and, if in Iravatans, will be pious. 


23-27. Effects of the Divisional Dignities of Dharm’s Lord. If Dharm’s Lord is in 
Pariyatans, the native will visit holy places, if in Uttamans, has been visiting holy places 
in the past births and he will do the same within this life-time, if in Gopurans, will 
perform sacrificial rites, if in Simhasanans, will be mighty and truthful, conquerer of his 
senses and will concentrate only on the Brahman, giving up all religions, if in 
Paravatans, will be the greatest of ascetics, if in Devalokans, will be an ascetic, holding 
a cudgel (Lagudi), or he will be a religious mendicant, that has renounced all mundane 
attachments and carrying three long staves, tied together, in his right hand (Tridandin) 
and, if in Brahmalokans, will perform Aswamedh Yagya (Horse Sacrifice) and will 
attain the state of Lord Indra, if in Iravatans, will be a synonym of Dharma, or virtues 
just, as Lord Ram and Yudhishtira. 


28. Lords of Kendras and Konas Related. The Kendras are known, as Vishnu Sthanas 
(Bhavas of Lord Vishnu), while the Konas are called Lakshmi Sthanas. If the Lord of a 
Kendr establishes a relationship with the Lord of a Kon, a Raj Yog is obtained. 


(A sixth kind of relationship can also be extended in this context to Navans positions, 
though there is no specific classic sanction for this. For example in the case of a Makar 
native Mangal in the Navané of Sukr and Sukr in the Navans of Mangal will confer a 
superior Raj Yog. This form of relationship will be equally superior, like the first 3 


relationships, mentioned in the earlier paragraph). 


29-34 Effects of the Divisional Dignities of Related Lords of Kendras and Lords of 
Konas. If the Lord of a Kendr and the Lord of a Kon, having a relationship, as indicated 
in Sloka 28, happen to be in Parijatans, the native will be king and will protect men, if in 
Uttamans, will be an excellent king, endowed with elephants, horses, chariots etc., if in 
Gopurans, will be a tiger of kings, honoured by other kings and, if in Simhasanans, will 
be an emperor, ruling over the entire earth. With the said Raj Yog relationship of the said 
Grahas in Simhasanans were born Harish Candr, Manu, Bali, Agni Deva and many 
emperors. In the present Yuga so born is Yudhishtira (Dharm Raj of Mahabharat). 
Salivahana’s birth and that of others will also come with this Yog. With such Lords, 
placed in Paravatans, Manu etc. were born. The Incarnations of Lord Vishnu took place, 
when such Lords were placed in Devalokans. With such Lords, placed in Brahmalokans, 
Lord Brahma was born and, placed in Iravatans, the Swayambhu Manu was born. (Manu 
is the first of the 14 Manus, identified, as the second creator, who produced the 
Prajapatis. To Manu the code of laws, Manu Smriti is ascribed). 


Ch. 42. Combinations for Penury 


1. O Lord, you have stated many Yogas, related to acquisition of wealth. Please tell me 
such Yogas, causing utter poverty. 


2. The native will be penniless, if Lagn’s Lord is in Vyaya Bhava, while Vyaya’s Lord is 
in Lagn along with the Lord of a Marak, or receives a Drishti from such a Grah. 


3. The native will be penniless, if Lagn’s Lord is in Ari Bhava, while Ari’s Lord is in 
Lagn, yuti with, or receiving a Drishti from a Marak Lord. 


4. Should Lagn, or Candr be with Ketu, while Lagn’s Lord is in Randhr Bhava, the 
person concerned will be penniless. 


5. If Lagn’s Lord along with a malefic is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, while Dhan’s 
Lord is in an enemy’s Rasi, or in debilitation, even a native of royal scion will become 


penniless. 


6. If Lagn’s Lord is yuti with the Lord of Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, or with Sani and, 
if Lagn’s Lord is devoid of a Drishti from a benefic, the native will be penniless. 


7. Should Putr’s and Dharm’s Lords be, respectively, found in Ari and Vyaya Bhava and 
receive a Drishti from Marak Grahas, the native will be penniless. 


8. If malefics, excepting the Lords of Karm and Dharm Bhava, happen to be in Lagn, 


associated with, or receiving a Drishti from Marak Grahas, one will become penniless. 


9. Note the Grahas, that are ruling the Rasis, occupied by the Lords of Ari, Randhr and 
Vyaya Bhava. If the said dispositors are in such evil Bhavas in turn and are associated 
with, or receive a Drishti from malefics, the native will be miserable and indigent. 


10. The Lord of the Navans, occupied by Candr, joining a Marak Grah, or occupying a 
Marak Bhava, will make one penniless. 


11. Should the Lord of the natal Lagn and that of the Navans Lagn be yuti with, or 
receive a Drishti from Marak Grahas, one will be penniless. 


12. If inauspicious Bhavas are occupied by benefics, while auspicious Bhavas are 
occupied by malefics, the native will be indigent and will be distressed even in the 
matter of food. 


13. A Grah, associated with one of the Lords of Ari, Randhr and Vyaya Bhava, being 
bereft of a Drishti from the Lord of a Kon, will in its Dasha periods cause harm to the 
native’s financial aspects. 


14. If the 8th/12th from Atma Karak, or Randhr/Vyaya Bhava receive a Drishti from the 
Atma Karak’s Navans Lord and the Lord of Janma Lagn, the native will be bereft of 
wealth. 


15. The native will be a spendthrift, if the 12th from Atma Karak receives a Drishti from 
the dispositor of Atma Karak, or, if Vyaya Bhava receives a Drishti from the Lord of 
Lagn. 


16-18. Now I tell you some Yogas for poverty along with conditions of their 
nullifications. Should Mangal and Sani be together in Dhan Bhava, the native’s wealth 
will be destroyed. Should Budh give a Drishti to Mangal and Sani in Dhan Bhava, there 
will be great wealth. There is no doubt in it. Siirya in Dhan Bhava, receiving a Drishti 
from Sani, will cause penury, while, if Sirya is in Dhan Bhava and does not receive a 
Drishti from Sani, riches and fame will be obtained. The same effects (poverty) will be 
declared, if Sani is in Dhan Bhava, receiving a Drishti from Sirya. 


Ch. 43. Longevity 


1. O Maharishi Parashar, you have dealt with combinations for wealth and poverty. 
Kindly detail methods of ascertaining the life-span of human beings. 


2-3. O Brahmin, for the benefit of mankind I narrate methods of ascertaining longevity. 


Knowing that longevity is difficult even for gods. Many exponents have laid down 
various methods of longevity calculations. Following is the summary of such schools of 
thought. 


4-8. Pindayu. The Grahas contribute to longevity, according to their being in exaltation, 
or debilitation and also based on their strengths and weaknesses and positions in Ashvini 
etc. and in the various Rasis. First of all Pindayu is based on the positions of the Grahas. 
O Brahmin, listen carefully to what I say: 19, 25, 15, 12, 15, 21 and 20 are the number 
of years, contributed by the Grahas, from Surya etc., when in exaltation. These are half 
of the above in debilitation. And, if the Grahas are in between exaltation and 
debilitation, the rule of three process should be used. Deduct the actual position of the 
Grah from its deep exaltation point. If the product is less than 6 Rasis, deduct it again 
from 12 Rasis. The product concerned should be multiplied by the number of years 
allotted to the Grah and divided by 12 to get the Grah’s actual contribution. 


9. Rectifications. Excepting Sukr and Sani, the contributions, made by others, should be 
halved, if they are eclipsed by Strya. One third should be reduced, if the Grah is in its 
inimical Rasi. This does not apply to the one in retrogression (see Vakra Charam). 


10-11. Deductions for Grahas in the Visible Half of the Zodiac. Full, half, one third, one 
fourth, one fifth and one sixth are the deductions of contributions, made by malefics, 
placed in the visible half of the zodiac. Benefics in such cases lose only half of what 
malefics lose. Should there be more than one Grah in a Bhava, the deduction, due to the 
strongest, will only 


prevail and not deductions, due to other Grahas in that particular Bhava. Waning Candr 
is a benefic for this purpose. 


12-13. Malefics in Lagn. In case Tanu Bhava is occupied by malefics, adopt the 
following procedure. Convert Lagn’s Sphuta into minutes of arc and multiply it by the 
years etc., contributed by the occupant, and divide by 21600. The years etc. so arrived be 
deducted from the respective contribution, which will be the net span, donated by the 
Grah. If there is benefic’s Drishti on Lagn, containing malefics, then the loss is only 
half. 


14-15. Lagn’s Contribution. The number of years, contributed by Lagn, will correspond 
to the number of RAsis it gained (from Mesh), while the degrees Lagn has gained in the 
particular Rasi will also correspondingly donate (30° = | year). If the Lagn’s Lord in the 
Navans is stronger than Lagn’s Lord, then the contribution should be computed only 
based on the number of Navansas gained (from Mesh), otherwise the computation will 
be for the Rasi Lagn. 


16-17. Nisargayu. O Brahmin, now I tell you about Nisargayu. 1, 2, 9, 20, 18, 20 and 50 
are the years, allotted to Candr, Mangal, Budh, Sukr, Guru, Strya and Sani from the 
period of birth. 


18-19. Ansayu. Now I will tell you about Ansayu contributions by Lagn and Grahas. The 
years correspond to the number of Navansas, counted from Mesh. Multiply the longitude 
in question by 108. If the product exceeds 12, expunge multiples of 12 and consider the 
final product in R&asis, degrees etc., as years, months etc. 


20-22. The same reductions, as per Pindayu, apply to Ansayu as well; i.e. half for a 
combust Grah, one third for inimical placement and the ones, due for placements in the 
half of the zodiac, counted from the 12th backwards. Some scholars suggest further 
corrections for Ansayu, viz. to increase threefold the contribution of a Grah in exaltation, 
or in own Bhava and double the contribution, if the contributor is in his own Navans, or 
in his own Dreshkan. If doubling and trebling is warranted, only trebling be done. In 
case of reductions also only halving is to be done, if both halving and reducing a third 
are required. That is how the final life-span of men be understood. 


23. Longevity for Other Living Beings. For other living beings as well such 
computations can be made. The said figure should be multiplied by the figure, 
corresponding to its full span of life and divided by the figure, corresponding to the full 
span of life for human beings. 


24-29. Full Life Span of Various Living Beings. Now I’1I tell you about the full life-span 
figures for various living beings. Gods and sages enjoy endless life-span (in 
astronomical proportions, as against ordinary mortals). The full life-span of eagles, owls, 
parrots, crows and snakes is one thousand years. For falcon, monkey, bear and frog the 
full span of life is 300 years. Demon’s full life-span is 150 years, while it is 120 for 
human beings, 32 for horses, 25 for donkeys and camels, 24 for oxen and buffaloes, 20 
for peacocks, 16 for goats and rams. 14 for swans, 12 for cuckoo, dog and dove, 8 for 
hens etc. and 7 for birds etc. 


30-31. Choice of Longevity. I have narrated 3 different methods of longevity. Listen to 
me about the choice among the three systems. According to which of the three, Lagn, 
Surya, or Candr is stronger than the other two, Ansayu, Pindayu, or Nisargayu should 
be, respectively, chosen. 


32. Doubtful Cases. If two among Lagn, Surya and Candr gain equal strength, then 
longevity should be worked out, as per both systems and the average of both should be 
considered. If all the three are equally strong, the average of the three should be 
considered. 


33-40. Other Clues to Longevity. O excellent of the Brahmins, I will now give you 
details of other methods in the matter of longevity, as under. This is based on the 
positions of Lagn’s Lord, Randhr’s Lord, Sani, Candr, natal Lagn and Hora Lagn. These 
six are grouped into three groups thus: the Lords of Lagn and of Randhr Bhava on the 
one hand, Sani and Candr on the other hand and the natal Lagn and Hora Lagn on yet 
the other hand. Out of a group of two, if the two are in Movable RAsis, long life is 
denoted. One in a Fixed RAsi and the other in a Dual R4si will also bestow long life. One 
in a Movable Rasi and the other in a Fixed Rasi will give medium life. If both are in 
Dual Rasis, then again medium life will be obtained. Short life is denoted, if one is in a 
Movable R&si, as the other is in a Dual R&si, or, if both are in Fixed Rasis. The type of 
life, denoted by three, or two groups be only considered. If the three groups denote 
different scales, then the one, indicated by the pair of natal Lagn and Hora Lagn should 
be only considered. In case of three different indications, if Candr is in Lagn, or Yuvati 
Bhava, then the one, indicated by the Sani-Candr pair will only come to pass. 


41-44. Further Clarifications. If long life is denoted by all the said three groups, the span 
is 120 years, if by two groups, it is 108 years and, if only by one group it is 91 years. If 
medium life is arrived at by three groups, it is 80 years, if indicated by 2 groups, it is 72 
years and, if by one group, it is 64 years. If short life is denoted by the said three groups, 
it is only 32 years, if indicated by two groups, the life-span is 36 years and, if by one 
group, the life-span is 40 years. These are rectified, as under. 


45-46. Rectifications. If the contributor is in the beginning of a R&si, his donation will be 
full and it will be nil, if he is at the end of a Rasi. For intermediary placements rule of 
three process will apply. Add the longitudes of the contributors and the sum so arrived at 
must be divided by the number of contributors. The latest product should be multiplied 
by the number of basic years and divided by 30. This will yield the net longevity. 


47. Special Rule for Sani. Should Sani be a contributor, the class of longevity declines. 
Some advocate contrarily an increase of class in this context. If Sani is in its own Rasi, 
or in exaltation, change in class will not occur. Even, if he receives a Drishti from, or is 
yuti with only a malefic, no change occurs. 


48. Special Rule for Guru. If Guru is in Lagn, or in Yuvati Bhava and receives a Drishti 
from, or is yuti with only benefics, the class of longevity will increase. 


49-50. Increase and Fall in Class of Longevity. From very short life to short life, from 
short life to medium life, from medium life to long life and from long life to extremely 
long life are the increases in the classification of longevity, when Guru warrants an 
increase. The reverse is true, if Sani warrants a fall in the span of life. 


51. (Maitreya says) You have narrated various kinds of longevity computations. Please 


favour me by denoting subtle classes thereof and poor and long life-spans. 


52. (Maharishi Parashar replies) These are seven-fold, viz. Bal Risht, Yog Risht, short, 
medium, long, super-natural (Divya) and immortality (Amritayu). 


53-54. The life-span in Bal Risht is 8 years, in Yog Risht 20 years, in short, medium and 
long lives, respectively, 32, 64 and 120 years. Super-natural life-span is 1000 years. 
Above this super-natural life-span of 1000 years it is Amritayu, which can be acquired 
only by those, who deserve it. 


55. Limitless Longevity. Should Kark be Lagn with Guru and Candr therein, while Sukr 
and Budh are in Kendras and others are in Sahaj, Ari and Labh Bhava, the native will 
obtain limitless longevity. 


56. Super-Natural Longevity. One having benefics in Kendras and/or Konas, while 
malefics are in Sahaj, Ari and Labh Bhava will obtain super-natural life-span. Randhr 
Bhava in this case should be one of the Rasis, owned by a benefic. 


57. Living until the End of the Yuga. One born in Kark Lagn will live till the end of the 
Yuga, if Guru is in a Kendr and happens to be in Gopurans, while Sukr is in a Kon and 
happens to be in Paravatans. 


58. Living the Life-Span of a Sage. Guru in Simhasanané, being in Lagn, Sani in 
Devalokans and Mangal in Paravatans. If these are so, one will enjoy the life-span, as 
due to a sage. 


59. Good Yogas increase the life-span and bad Yogas decrease the same. Hence I tell you 
such Yogas, as to know of full, medium and short span combinations. 


60. If a Kendr contains a benefic, while Lagn’s Lord is yuti with, or receives a Drishti 
from a benefic, or Guru in particular, the native will live a full span of life. 


61. Should Lagn’s Lord be in a Kendr yuti with, or receiving a Drishti from Guru and 
Sukr, full life-span will result. 


62. If at birth three Grahas are exalted, out of which the Lords of Lagn and Randhr 
Bhava are inclusive, as Randhr Bhava is devoid of a malefic in it, full life-span will 
result. 


63. Long life is denoted, if three Grahas are in Randhr Bhava, in exaltation, own, or 
friendly divisions, while Lagn’s Lord is strong. 


64. If Sani, or Lagn’s Lord is yuti with any exalted Grah, long life will result. 


65. Long life will be enjoyed, if malefics are in Sahaj, Ari and Labh Bhava, while 
benefics are in Kendras. 


66. If Ari, Yuvati and Randhr Bhava are occupied by benefics, while malefics are in 
Sahaj and Labh Bhava, full life-span will follow the birth. 


67. If Randhr’s Lord is friendly to Strya, while malefics are in Ari and Vyaya Bhava, as 
Lagn’s Lord is in a Kendr, the native will live the full span of life. 


68. O excellent of the Brahmins, if a malefic is in Randhr Bhava, while Karm’s Lord is 
exalted, one will be long-lived. 


69. Long life will follow, if Lagn is a Dual Rasi, while Lagn’s Lord is in a Kendr, or in 
exaltation, or in a Kon. 


70. Should Lagn be a Dual R4si, while two malefics are in a Kendr with reference to a 
strong Lagn’s Lord, long life is indicated. 


71-73. If the stronger among Lagn’s Lord and Randhr’s Lord is placed in a Kendr, long 
life is indicated and, if in a Panaphara, medium life is indicated, if in Apoklima, short 
life will come to pass. According to Lagn’s Lord being friendly, neutral, or inimical to 
Surya, long, medium, or short life will result. 


74. Should Mangal and Sahaj’s Lord, or Randhr’s Lord and Sani be combust, or be yuti 
with malefics, or receive a Drishti from malefics, there will be short life. 


75. If Lagn’s Lord is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, yuti with malefics and devoid of 
Yuti with and/or Drishti from a benefic, short life will come to pass. 


76. If malefics are in Kendras, devoid of Yuti with, or a Drishti from benefics, while 
Lagn’s Lord is not strong, only short life will result. 


77. O excellent of Brahmins, if Vyaya and Dhan Bhava are occupied by malefics and 
devoid of a Drishti from a benefic, or of Yuti with a benefic, the native will be short- 
lived. 


78. If the Lords of Lagn and Randhr Bhava are bereft of dignities and strength, short life 
will come to pass. If the Lords of Lagn and Randhr Bhava are helped by others, while 
being so, medium life-span will come to pass. 


Ch. 44. Marak Grahas 


1. O Maharishi Parashar, you have mentioned a lot about longevity. Be kind enough to 
throw light on Marakas, or killers. 


2-5. O Brahmin, Sahaj and Randhr Bhava are the two Bhavas of longevity. The Bhavas, 
related to death, are the 12th from each of these, i.e. Dhan and Yuvati Bhava are Marak 
Bhavas. 


3. Out of the two, Dhan Bhava is a powerful Marak Bhava. The Lords of Dhan and 
Yuvati Bhava, malefics in Dhan and Yuvati Bhava and malefics, yuti with Dhan’s Lord 
and yuti with Yuvati’s Lord are all known, as Marakas. The major and sub-periods of 
these Grahas will bring death on the native, depending on whether he is a long life, 
medium life, or short life person. 


6-7. The Dasha of a benefic Grah, related to Vyaya’s Lord may also inflict death. End 
may descend on the native in Randhr’s Lord’s Dasha. The Dasha of a Grah, which is an 
exclusive malefic, may also cause death. 


9. Should Sani be ill-disposed and be related to a Marak Grah, he will be the first to kill 
in preference to other Grahas. 


10-14. O Brahmin, I tell you further about Marakas. Narrated earlier are three kinds of 
life-spans, viz. short, medium and long. Short life is before 32 years, later on up to 64 it 
is medium life and from 64 to 100 it is long life. Beyond 100 the longevity is called 
supreme. O excellent of the Brahmins, it is impossible to decide upon longevity till the 
native is 20 years old. Till such year the child should be protected by sacred recitations, 
religious offerings (of Ghi etc.) to consecrated fire, as prescribed in the Vedas etc. and 
through medical treatments, for premature death may descend on the child due to sins of 
father and mother, or of its own (in the previous birth). 


15-21. I further mention about the Marak Grahas. One born with short life combinations 
may face death in the Dasha, denoted by Vipat star (3rd from the birth star), one of 
medium life may die in the Dasha, denoted by Pratyak star (Sth from the birth star). In 
the Dasha, denoted by Vadh star (7th from the birth star), one with long life may obtain 
his end. The Dasha of the Lord of the 22nd Dreshkan, or 23rd, or 3rd, or 5th, or 7th 
asterisms may also cause death. The Lords of the 2nd and the 12th, counted from Kark, 
may bring death. This is true, when Candr is a malefic. If he happens to be a benefic, 
there will be diseases (not death). Death may come to pass in the Dasha of Ari’s Lord 
and in the subperiods of Ari’s, Randhr’s and/or Vyaya’s Lords. Should there be many 
Marakas and, if these Marakas are strong, there will be diseases, miseries etc. in major 
and sub-periods. Thus these are Marakas and are primarily related to bring death upon 


the native. According to their dispositions there may be death, or difficulties. 


22-24. Rahu and Ketu, as Marakas. If Rahu, or Ketu are placed in Tanu, Yuvati, Randhr, 
or Vyaya Bhava, or happen to be in the 7th from a Marak Lord, or are placed with such a 
Grah, they acquire powers of killing in their major, or sub-periods. For one born in 
Makar, or in Vrischik, Rahu will be a Marak. Should Rahu be in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya 
Bhava, he will give difficulties in his Dasha periods. He will not, however, do so, if 
Rahu receives a Drishti from, or is yuti with a benefic. 


25-31. Sahaj Bhava and Death. O excellent of Brahmins, if Stirya, being with strength, is 
in Sahaj Bhava, one will obtain his death, due to a king (legal punishments). Candr in 
Sahaj Bhava will cause death, due to tuberculosis, while wounds, weapons, fire and 
thirst will cause death through Mangal in Sahaj Bhava. If Sahaj Bhava receives a Drishti 
from, or is occupied by Sani and Rahu, death will be through poison, water, or fire, or 
fall from heights, or confinement. Death will surely come to descend through insects, or 
leprosy, if Candr and Gulik occupy, or give a Drishti to Sahaj Bhava. Budh, giving a 
Drishti to, or occupying Sahaj Bhava, will bring death, followed by fever. Guru in Sahaj 
Bhava, or giving a Drishti to Sahaj Bhava, will cause death by swelling, or tumours. 
Urinary diseases will cause death, if Sukr is in, or gives a Drishti to Sahaj Bhava. Many 
Grahas, giving a Drishti to, or occupying Sahaj Bhava, will bring death through many 
diseases. 


32. If Sahaj Bhava is occupied by a benefic, death will be in an auspicious place (like a 
shrine) and, if Sahaj Bhava is occupied by a malefic, death will be in sinful places. 
Mixed occupation of Sahaj Bhava will yield mixed results with regard to the place of 
death. 


33. Consciousness will prevail at the time of death, if Guru, or Sukr are placed in Sahaj 
Bhava. With other Grahas in Sahaj Bhava there will be unconsciousness before death. 


34. According to Sahaj Bhava being a Movable, a Fixed, or a Dual RAsi, death will be, 
respectively, in a foreign place (other than native birth place), in one’s own house, or on 
the way. 


35-36. Occupants of Randhr Bhava. Note the occupant of Randhr Bhava. If it is Surya, 
death will be through fire, if Candr is in Randhr Bhava, through water, if Mangal, 
through weapons, if Budh, through fever, if Guru, through diseases, if Sukr, through 
hunger and, if Sani, through thirst. 


37. If Randhr Bhava is occupied by, or receives a Drishti from a benefic, while Dharm’s 
Lord is yuti with a benefic, the native will die in a shrine. If Randhr Bhava is occupied 
by, or receives a Drishti from a malefic, while Dharm’s Lord is yuti with a malefic, 


death will be in a place, other than a shrine. 


38-39. Fate of the Human Physical System. Should there be a benefic’s Dreshkan in 
Randhr Bhava (22nd Dreshkan), the body will be burnt in fire (as prescribed in 
Shastras). If a malefic’s Dreshkan happens to be in Randhr Bhava, the body will be 
thrown away in water. If the Dreshkan in Randhr Bhava is owned by a mixed Grah, the 
dead body will only dry up. If the Dreshkan in Randhr Bhava is a serpent Dreshkan, the 
body will be eaten away by animals, crows etc. 


40. Serpent Dreshkanas. The 2nd and 3rd Dreshkan in Kark, the initial one in Vrischik 
and the last one in Meen are designated, as serpent Dreshkanas. 


41-42. Pre-natal Abode. O excellent of Brahmins, the stronger of the two luminaries, 
Surya and Candr, occupying a Dreshkan of Guru, denotes the descent from the world of 
gods. If the stronger of the luminaries occupies the Dreshkan of Sukr, or Candr, the 
descent is from the world of the Manes, if the stronger of the two luminaries is in the 
Dreshkan of Sirya, or Mangal, the descent is from the world of Yama (world of the 
death) and, if in Dreshkan of Budh, or Sani, the descent is from the hell. 


43-45. Ascent after Death. According to the following Grahas in Vyaya, Yuvati, Ari, or 
Randhr Bhava, the native will attain one of the different worlds after death: Guru 
heaven, Candr, or Sukr the world of Manes, Mangal and/or Surya earth (rebirth), Budh 
and/or Sani hell. In case the said Bhavas are not occupied, the native will go to the 
world, indicated by the stronger of the Dreshkan Lords, related to Ari and Randhr 
Bhava. The relative Grah’s exaltation etc. will denote the high, medium and low status 
the native will obtain in the said world. 


46. Other Grahas and RAasis, becoming Marakas, are being discussed in the chapter, 
related to Dashas. 


Ch. 45. Avasthas of Grahas 


1. O Maharishi Parashar, you have earlier stated, that the Avasthas, or states of the 
Grahas are to be considered in the context of the effects of the Grahas. Be so kind to tell 
me about this. 


2. O excellent of Brahmins, various kinds of Avasthas of the Grahas have been 
expounded. Out of these, I will give you the summary of Baal (infant) and other states of 
the Grahas. 


3. Baal, Kumar, Yuv, Vriddh and Mrit Avastha (Baal Adi Avasthas). Infant, youthful, 
adolescent, old and dead are the states of the Grahas, placed in the ascending order at the 


rate of six degrees in odd RAsis. In the case of even RAsis this arrangement is in reverse 
order. (Vriddh - Advanced, Mrit - In extremis) 


4. Results. One fourth, half, full, negligible and nil are the grades of the results, due to a 
Grah in infant, youthful, adolescent, old and dead Avasthas. 


5. Awakening, Dreaming and Sleeping States. If a Grah is in its own R&si, or in 
exaltation, it is said to be in a state of awakening (alertness). In the Rasi of a friend, or of 
a neutral it is in dreaming state, while in an enemy’s Rasi, or in debilitation it is in a state 
of sleeping. 


6. According to a Grah, being in Awakening, Dreaming, or Sleeping states, the results, 
due to it will be full, medium, or nil. 


7. Other Kinds of States. There are nine kinds of other Avasthas, viz. Dipt, Swasth, 
Pramudit, Shanta, Din, Vikal, Duhkhit, Khal and Kop. 


8-10. If a Grah is in its exaltation Rasi, it is in Dipt Avastha, if in its own RAsi, it is in 
Swasth, if in a great friend’s Rasi, it is in Pramudit, if in a friendly Rasi, it is in Shanta, if 
in a neutral R4asi, it is in Din, if a Grah is yuti with a malefic, it is in Vikal, if is in an 
enemy’s R&si, it is in Duhkhit, if in a great enemy’s RAsi, it is in Khal and, if a Grah is 
being eclipsed by Surya, it is in Kop. Depending on such a state of the Grah, the Bhava, 
occupied by it will obtain corresponding effects. 


11-18. Yet other Avasthas. Lajjit, Garvit, Kshudhit, Trushit, Mudit and Kshobhit are the 
other kinds of Avasthas, due to the Grahas. Placed in Putr Bhava, if a Grah is associated 
with Rahu, or Ketu, or with Sirya, Sani, or Mangal, it is in Lajjit Avastha. If a Grah is in 
exaltation, or in Mooltrikon, it is Garvit. If a Grah is in an enemy’s R&si, or yuti with an 
enemy, or receives a Drishti from an enemy, or even, if a Grah is yuti with Sani, the 
Avastha is Kshudhit. If a Grah is in a watery Rasi and receives a Drishti from a malefic, 
but does not receive a Drishti from a benefic, the Avastha is called Trushit. If a Grah is 
in a friendly Rasi, or is yuti with, or receives a Drishti from a benefic, or is yuti with 
Guru, it is said to be in Mudit Avastha. If a Grah is yuti with Surya and receives a 
Drishti from, or is yuti with a malefic, or receives a Drishti from an enemy, it is said to 
be in Kshobhit. The Bhavas, occupied by a Grah in Kshudhit, or in Kshobhit, are 
destroyed. 


19-23. The learned should estimate the effects, due to a Bhava, in the manner, cited 
above, after ascertaining the strength and weakness. Weak Grahas cause reduction in 
good effects, while stronger ones give greater effects. Ifa Grah, posited in Karm Bhava, 
is in Lajjit, Kshudhit Avastha, or Kshobhit Avastha, the person will always be subjected 
to miseries. If a Grah in Putr is in Lajjit, there will be destruction of progeny, or there 


will be only one surviving child. Surely the wife of the native will die, if there is a Grah 
in Yuvati in Kshobhit, or in Trushit Avastha. 


24-29. Effects of Garvit, Mudit, Lajjit, Kshobhit, Kshudhit and Trushit Avastha. A Grah 
in Garvit Avastha will cause happiness through new houses and gardens, regalhood, skill 
in arts, financial gains at all times and improvement in business. A Grah in Mudit 
Avastha will give residences, clothes, ornaments, happiness from lands and wife, 
happiness from relatives, living in royal places, destruction of enemies and acquisition 
of wisdom and learning. A Grah in Lajjit will give aversion to God, loss of intelligence, 
loss of child, interest in evil speeches and listlessness in good things. A Grah in Kshobhit 
will give acute penury, evil disposition, miseries, financial debacles, distress to feet and 
obstruction to income, due to royal wrath. A Grah in Kshudhit will cause downfall, due 
to grief and passion, grief on account of relatives, physical decline, troubles from 
enemies, financial distress, loss of physical strength and an 


eclipsed mind, due to miseries. A Grah in Trushit Avastha will cause diseases through 
association with females, leading over wicked deeds, loss of wealth, due to one’s own 
men, physical weakness, miseries, caused by evil people and decline of honour. 


30-37. Calculation of Shayan Adi Avasthas. Now I will tell you of the Avasthas, viz. 
Shayan, Upavesan, Netrapani, Prakash, Gaman, Agaman, Sabh, Agam, Bhojan, Nritya 
Lips, Kautuk and Nidr and the Chesthas of such Avasthas. Note the number of the star, 
occupied by the Grah, for which an Avastha is to be calculated. Multiply that number by 
the number, denoted by the Grah (Siirya 1 to Sani 7). The figure so arrived at should 
again be multiplied by the number of the Navans, where the Grah is in. Add to this the 
number of the birth asterism (ruling star, the one, occupied by Candr), the number of 
Ghatis of birth and the number of Rasis, Lagn gained from Mesh (Mesh 1, Vrishabh 2 
and so forth). This figure should be divided by 12 and the remainder will indicate the 
corresponding Avastha of the Grah. The sub-state in the said Avastha can be found out in 
the following way. Multiply the figure (Sayan | to Nidr 12), denoted by the Avastha 
concerned, by the same figure and increase it by the figure, denoted by the Anka value 
for the first syllable of the native’s personal name. Divide the product so obtained by 12. 
The remainder thereof should be further increased by constant additives of the Grahas in 
the following way: Strya 5, Candr 2, Mangal 2, Budh 3, Guru 5, Sukr 3, Sani 3, Rahu 
(Ketu) 4. The product so arrived at should be divided by 3. In the process of calculation, 
if it happens, that the remainder is 1, it is Drishti, if 2, it is Chesht and, if 0, it is 
Vichesht. 


Notes. Shayan Adi are of supreme importance, as compared to the other kinds of 
Avasthas. 


In place of Navans, given above, some translators interpret the word Ans, as degree, 


occupied by the Grah, which is obviously not correct. In this connection the reader’s 
attention is drawn to Balabhadr’s Hora Ratna, Ch. 3, wherein the author, Balabhadr 
himself, gives an example for Siirya, being in the 7th Navans of Simh and thus he 
considered only 7, as multiplier. He quotes Adhibhut Sagara, as his authority for 
calculation of Sayan Adi. 


Agaman Avastha is known, as Gamanechch by some exponents. 


Anka value is | for a, ka, cha, d a, dha, bha and va, 2 for i, kha, ja, dha, na, ma and sha, 
3 for u, ga, jha, ta, pa, ya and Sa, 4 for e, gha, t a, tha, pha, ra and sa, 5 for o, ca, tha, da, 
ba, la and ha. 


38-39. Effects of Chesht etc. If the sub-state is Drishti in an Avastha, the results, being 
stated for the Avastha, will be medium, the effects will be full in Chesht and negligible 
in Vichesht. The good and bad effects of Grahas should be deciphered, based on the 
strength and weakness of the Grahas. In exaltation the Grahas reveal effects in a 
pronounced manner, due to Avasthas. 


40-51. Effects of Stirya’s Avasthas. If Siirya is in Sayan Avastha, the native will incur 
digestive deficiency, many diseases, stoutness of legs, bilious vitiation, ulcer in the anus 
and heart strokes; if in Upavesan, will suffer poverty, will carry loads, will indulge in 
litigations, be hard-hearted, wicked and will lose in his undertakings; if is in Netrapani, 
will always be happy, wise, helpful to others, endowed with prowess and wealth, very 
happy and will gain royal favours; if in Prakash, will be liberal in disposition, have 
plenty of wealth, be a significant speaker in the assembly, will perform many 
meritorious acts, be greatly strong and endowed with charming beauty; if in Gaman, will 
be disposed to live in foreign places, be 


miserable, indolent, bereft of intelligence and wealth, be distressed, due to fear and will 
be short-tempered; if in Agaman, will be interested in others’ wives, be devoid of his 
own men, be interested in movements and skilful in doing evil deeds, be dirty, ill- 
disposed and will be a talebearer; if in Sabh, will be disposed to help others, be always 
endowed with wealth and gems, be virtuous, endowed with lands, new houses and robes, 
be very strong, very affectionate to his friends and very kindly disposed; if in Agam, will 
be distressed, due to enemies, fickle-minded, evil-minded, emaciated, devoid of virtuous 
acts and intoxicated with pride; if in Bhojan, will experience pains in joints, will lose 
money on account of others’ females, will have strength, declining off and on, be 
untruthful, will incur head-aches, eat remnant food and will take to bad ways; if in 
Nritya Lips, will be honoured by the learned, be a scholar, will have knowledge of 
poetry etc. and will be adored by kings on the earth; if is Kautuk, will always be happy, 
will be endowed with Vedic Knowledge and will perform Yagyas, will move amidst 
kings, have fear from enemies, will be charming-faced and be endowed with knowledge 


of poetry; if in Nidr, will have a strong tendency towards being drowsy, will live in 
foreign (distant) places, will incur harm to his wife and will face financial destruction. 
Surya in Upavesan will make one an artisan, black in complexion, devoid of learning 
and miserable. One will serve others. In Netrapani there will be all kinds of happiness, if 
Surya is in Putr, Dharm, Karm, or Yuvati. In other Bhavas Netrapani of Siirya will give 
eye diseases and enmity with all. If Surya is in Prakash, the native will be meritorious, 
religious and liberal, will enjoy pleasures, be equal to a prince and will enjoy the status 
of Kuber, the God of wealth. However, the Prakash of Sirya, placed in Yuvati, or Putr 
will cause loss of the first child and will produce many litigations. If Surya is in Gaman, 
the native will incur disease of the feet and will be very mean. If in Agaman, Sirya in 
Vyaya, or in Yuvati will destroy progeny and will give very limited wealth. If in Agam, 
Surya will give many miseries, an ugly appearance and foolishness. However, he will 
give wealth. Strya in Bhojan in Dharm will cause many hindrances to spiritual and 
religious undertakings. In other Bhavas Surya in Bhojan will cause head and ear 
diseases, apart from joint pains. Though Maharishi Parashar states, that the native with 
Surya in Kautuk Avastha will have fear from enemies, Bal Bhadr exempts such evil 
effect for the Ari Bhava position. Stirya in Kautuk in other Bhavas will give a number of 
daughters, two wives, itch, excellence, liberality etc. If Surya is in Nidr, the native will 
be predisposed to incur piles and elephantiasis, will experience a lack of peace and he 
will be liable to lose his first child. 


52-63. Effects of Candr’s Avasthas. If Candr is in Sayan, the native will be honourable, 
sluggish, given to sexual lust and he will face financial destruction; if in Upavesan, will 
be troubled by diseases, be dull-witted, not endowed with mentionable wealth, will be 
hard-hearted, will do unworthy acts and will steal others’ wealth; if in Netrapani, will be 
troubled by great diseases (long lasting in nature), be very garrulous, wicked and will 
indulge in bad deeds. Should Candr be in Prakash, the native will be famous in the 
world, will have his virtues exposed through royal patronage, will be surrounded by 
horses, elephants, females and ornaments, will visit shrines. If Candr is in Gaman with 
decreasing rays, the native will be sinful, cruel and always troubled by afflictions of 
sight. If Candr is in Gaman with increasing rays, the native will be distressed, due to 
fear. If Candr is in Agaman, the native will be honourable, will suffer diseases of the 
feet, will secretly indulge in sinful acts, will be poor and devoid of intelligence and 
happiness; if in Sabh, will be eminent among men, honoured by kings and kings of 
kings, will be very beautiful, will subdue the passion of women and will be skilful in 
sexual acts, will be virtuous; if in Agam, will be garrulous and virtuous and, if the said 
Candr is of dark fortnight, the native will have two wives, he will be sick, highly wicked 
and violent; if in Bhojan, will be endowed with honour, conveyances, attendants, social 
status, wife and daughters, provided Candr is Full ‘Purna’; if in Bhojan and is of dark 
fortnight, 


auspicious effects will fail to come; if in Nritya Lips and is endowed with (fortnightly) 


strength, will be strong, will have knowledge of songs and will be a critic of beauty of 
things; if in Nritya Lips and of dark fortnight, i.e. not endowed with strength, the person 
will be sinful; if in Kautuk, the native will attain kingship, lordship over wealth and skill 
in sexual acts and in sporting with harlots. Should waxing Candr, being yuti with Guru, 
be in Nidr, the native will be quite eminent. If waxing Candr is in Nidr, but devoid of 
Guru’s Yuti, the native will lose his wealth on account of females and female jackals will 
be crying around his abode (as though it were a cemetery). 


64 75. Effects of the Avasthas of Mangal. If Mangal is in Sayan, the native will be 
troubled by wounds, itch and ulcer. If Mangal is placed in Upavesan, the native will be 
strong, sinful, untruthful, eminent, wealthy and bereft of virtues. If Mangal is placed in 
Lagn and happens to be in Netrapani, there will be penury; if placed in other Bhavas, 
Netrapani will confer rulership of a city. Should Mangal be in Prakash, the native will 
shine with virtues and will be honoured by the king. Mangal in Prakash in Putr will 
cause loss of children and of wife. If Mangal is in Prakash in Putr and happens to be 
there with Rahu, a severe (positional) fall will descend on the native. Should Mangal be 
in Gaman, the native will be always roaming, will have fear of multiple ulcers, will incur 
misunderstandings with females, will be afflicted by boils, itches etc. and will incur 
financial decline. If Mangal happens to be in Agaman Avastha, the native will be 
virtuous, endowed with precious gems, will adore a sharp sword, will walk with the gait 
of an elephant, will destroy his enemies and will remove the miseries of his people. If 
Mangal is placed in Sabh and happens to be in exaltation, the native will be skilful in 
conducting wars, will hold the flag of righteousness aloft and will be wealthy; if Mangal 
happens to be in Sabh in Putr, or Dharm, the native will be bereft of learning; if Mangal 
is in Sabh in Vyaya, childlessness and no wife and no friends will result; if Mangal is in 
other Bhavas in Sabh, the native will be a scholar in a king’s court (poet laureate), be 
very wealthy, honourable and charitable. If Mangal is in Agam, the native will be devoid 
of virtues and good deeds, will be distressed by diseases, will acquire diseases of the 
root of the ears (“Karan Mularogam’ & ‘Padamulam Urumulam’ etc.) and severe gout 
pains, will be timid and will befriend evil lot. If Mangal is with strength, while in 
Bhojan Avastha, the native will eat sweet-food; if devoid of strength, will indulge in 
base acts and be dishonourable. If Mangal is in Nritya Lips, the native will earn wealth 
through the king and will be endowed with fullness of gold, diamonds and corals in his 
house; if in Kautuk, will be curious in disposition and will be endowed with friends and 
sons; if in Kautuk and simultaneously exalted, will be honoured by the king and the 
virtuous and will be virtuous himself; if in Nidr, will be short-tempered, devoid of 
intelligence and wealth, will be wicked, fallen from virtuous path and troubled by 
diseases. Should Mangal be in Upavesan in Lagn, the native will be extremely sinful and 
he will incur several diseases, will be indigent and not peaceful. If Upavesan occurs for 
Mangal in Dharm, the native will lose his whole wealth apart from his wife and progeny. 
Mangal in Netrapani in Lagn will give poverty and will destroy the native’s wife and 
progeny; 1f Mangal is in Netrapani in other Bhavas, this confers on the native all kinds 


of wealth and happiness from wife and children. The Dhan, or Yuvati position of Mangal 
in Netrapani will cause fear from lions and snakes apart from giving earnings from 
lands. Furthermore the native’s wife will predecease him. Should Mangal be in Prakash 
in Putr, or in Yuvati, the native will lose his wife and all children. If Mangal is placed in 
Putr in Prakash and is yuti with Sani, the native will kill cows. Should Mangal be in 
Gaman in Lagn, the native will be active in his assignments, will incur diseases of the 
joints, burning pains in the eyes and will obtain dental afflictions and the like, he will 
have fear from dogs and will adore the guise of a female. In other Bhavas Mangal in 
Gaman will bring royal favours, leadership and luxuries of life. Mangal in Agaman will 
cause piles and diseases of the rectum. If Mangal is in Bhojan, or in 


Sayan in Putr, or in Randhr, there will be untimely death for the native. In other Bhavas 
Bhojan of Mangal will confer wealth. Should Mangal be in Nritya Lips and happens to 
be in Lagn, Dhan, Yuvati, or Karm, the native will receive all kinds of happiness; there 
will be miseries in abundance, if Mangal is in Nritya Lips and placed in Randhr, or 
Dharm, apart from incurring untimely death. In other Bhavas Nritya Lips of Mangal will 
make the native akin to Kuber. Mangal in Yuvati, or in Dharm in Kautuk will give 
several diseases and death of the first child and wife. In other Bhavas Kautuk will confer 
scholarship, various kinds of wealth, two wives and more female children. In Nidr 
Mangal in Lagn, Dhan, Sahaj, Dharm, Karm, or Labh will give scholarship, foolishness 
and poverty. Putr, or Yuvati placement of Mangal in Nidr will give many miseries and 
many male children. Should Rahu join Mangal in Nidr in any Bhava, the native will 
have many wives, be miserable and will suffer from some diseases on the surface of the 
feet. 


76-86. Effects of Budh’s Avasthas. Should Budh in Sayan be in Lagn, the native will be 
lame and will have reddish eyes (like the black bee); if Budh is in Sayan in other 
Bhavas, the native will be addicted to licentious (disregarding certain rules) pleasures 
and be wicked. If Budh is in Upavesan in Lagn, the native will possess (the seven 
principle) virtues; if Budh in Upavesan is in Lagn, receiving a Drishti from a malefic, or 
Drishtis from malefics, or is yuti with malefics, penury will result; if Budh in Upavesan 
is in Lagn, receiving a Drishti from a benefic, or Drishtis from benefics, or is yuti with 
benefics, financial happiness will follow. If Budh is in Netrapani, the native will be 
devoid of learning, wisdom, well wishers and satisfaction, but he will be honourable; if 
Budh is in Putr in Netrapani, the subject will be bereft of happiness from wife and sons, 
will be endowed with (more) female children and will gain abundant finance through 
royal patronage. If Budh is in Prakash, the native will be charitable, merciful and 
meritorious, he will cross the boundaries of ocean in respect of many branches of 
learning, he will be endowed with the great faculty of discrimination and will destroy 
evil people; if in Gaman, will visit the courts of kings on many occasions and Goddess 
Lakshmi will dwell in his abode; if in Agaman, the same effects, due to his being in 
Gaman, will fructify; if in Sabh and happens to be in exaltation, will be affluent and 


meritorious at all times, will be equal to Kuber, or will be a king, or a minister, will be 
devoted to Lord Vishnu and Lord Shiva, will be virtuous and will attain full 
enlightenment. Should Budh be in Agam, the native will serve base men and will gain 
wealth thereby, will have two sons and one fame bringing daughter. If Budh is in 
Bhojan, the native will face financial losses through litigations, will physically lose on 
account of fear from the king, will be fickle-minded and will be bereft of physical and 
conjugal felicity; if in Nritya Lips, will be endowed with honour, conveyances, corals 
(gems etc.), sons, friends, prowess and recognition in assembly, due to his scholarship; if 
Budh in Nritya Lips Avastha is in a malefic’s Rasi, the native will be addicted to 
prostitutes and will long for licentious pleasures. If Budh is in Kautuk in Lagn, the 
native will be skilful in music; if Budh is in Yuvati, or Randhr with Kautuk, the native 
will be addicted to courtezans; if Budh in Kautuk is placed in Dharm, the native will be 
meritorious and attain heavens after death. If Budh is in Nidr, the native will not enjoy 
comfortable sleep, will be afflicted by neck, or neck joint ‘Samadhi’ diseases, will be 
devoid of co-born, afflicted by miseries galore, will enter into litigations with his own 
men and will lose wealth and honour. 


87-98. Effects of Guru’s Avasthas. If Guru is in Sayan, the native will be strong, but will 
speak in whispers, he will be very tawny in complexion, will have prominent cheeks and 
will have fear from enemies; if in Upavesan, will be garrulous and very proud, will be 
troubled by the king and enemies and will have ulcers on the feet shanks, face and 
hands; if in Netrapani, will be afflicted by diseases, be devoid of wealth, fond of music 
and dances, libidinous, tawny 


in complexion and will be attached to people of other castes; if in Prakash, will enjoy 
virtues, will be happy, splendourous and will visit holy places, devoted to Lord Krishna; 
if Guru in Prakash is exalted, will attain greatness among men and will be equal to 
Kuber; if in Gaman, will be adventurous, happy on account of friends, scholarly and 
endowed with Vedic learning and with various kinds of wealth; if in Agaman, serving 
force, excellent women and the goddess of wealth will never leave the native’s abode; if 
in Sabh, will attain comparability with Guru (God of speech) in the matter of speech, 
will be endowed with superior corals, rubies and wealth, will be rich with elephants, 
horses and chariots and will be supremely learned; if in Agam, will be endowed with 
various conveyances, honours, retinue (many persons will take good care of him), 
children, wife, friends and learning, will be equal to a king, extremely noble, fond of 
literature and will take to the path of the virtuous; if in Bhojan, will always beget 
excellent food and horses, elephants and chariots, while Lakshmi, the Goddess of 
Wealth, will never leave his house; if in Nritya Lips, will receive royal honours, be 
wealthy, endowed with knowledge of moral law ‘Dharma’ and Tantra, will be supreme 
among the learned and be a great grammarian; if in Kautuk, will be curious in 
disposition, very rich, will shine, like Surya in his circles, be exceedingly kind, happy, 
honoured by the kings, endowed with sons, wealth and just disposition, will be very 


strong and he will be a scholar in the king’s court; if in Nidr, will be foolish in all his 
undertakings, will suffer irredeemable penury and will be devoid of righteous acts. 


99-110. Effects of Sukr’s Avasthas. If Sukr is in Sayan, the native, although strong, will 
incur dental disease, he will be very short-tempered, bereft of wealth, will seek union 
with courtezans and be licentious; if in Upavesan, will be endowed with a multitude of 
nine gems (‘Navamin Vraja’) and golden ornaments, be ever happy, will destroy 
enemies and will be honoured by the king, will have highly increased honours; if in 
Netrapani in Lagn, Yuvati, or Karm, there will be loss of wealth on account of afflictions 
of the sense of sight (heavy medical expenses, due to severe eye diseases); if Netrapani 
occurs, when Sukr is in other Bhavas, the native will own large houses. Should Sukr be 
in Prakash in its own RAsi, in its exaltation Rasi, or in a friendly RAsi, the native will 
sport, like a lofty elephant, will be equal to a king and be skilful in poetry and music. If 
Sukr is in Gaman, the native will not have a long-living mother, will lament over 
separation from his own people and will have fear from enemies; if in Agaman, will 
command abundant wealth, will undertake to visit superior shrines, will be ever 
enthusiastic and will contract diseases of the hand and foot; if in Sabh, will earn 
eminence in the king’s court, will be very virtuous, will destroy enemies, be equal to 
Kuber in wealth, will be charitable, will ride on horses and will be excellent among men; 
if in Agam, there will be no advent of wealth, but there will be troubles from enemies, 
separation from children and relatives, diseases and lack of pleasures from the wife. 
Should Sukr be in Bhojan, the native will be distressed, due to hunger, diseases and 
many kinds of fear from enemies; if Sukr is in Kanya in Bhojan, the native will be very 
rich and will be honoured by scholars. If Sukr is in Nritya Lips, the native will be skilful 
in literature and intelligent, will play musical instruments, like lute, tabla etc., be 
meritorious and very affluent; if in Kautuk, will be equal to Lord Indra, will attain 
greatness in the assembly, be learned and will have Lakshmi always dwelling in his 
abode; if in Nidr, will be interested in serving others, will blame others, be heroic, 
garrulous and will be wandering all over the earth. 


111-122. Effects of Sani’s Avasthas. If Sani is in Sayan, the native will be troubled by 
hunger and thirst, will incur diseases in boyhood and later on he will become wealthy; if 
in Upavesan, will be troubled greatly by enemies, will contract dangers, will have ulcers 
all over the body, will be self-respected and will be punished by the king; if in 
Netrapani, will be endowed with a charming female, wealth, royal favour and friends, 
will have knowledge of many arts and 


will be an eloquent speaker; if in Prakash, will be very virtuous, very wealthy, 
intelligent, sportive, splendourous, merciful and devoted to Lord Shiva; if in Gaman, 
will be very rich and endowed with sons, will grab enemy’s lands and will be a scholar 
at royal court; if in Agaman, will be akin to a donkey (foolish) and bereft of happiness 
from wife and children, will always roam pitiably without anybody’s patronage; if in 


Sabh, the native will have surprising possessions of abundant precious stones and gold, 
will be endowed with great judicial (political) knowledge and will be extremely brilliant; 
if in Agam, will incur diseases and will not be skilful in earning royal patronage; if in 
Bhojan, will enjoy tastes of food, will be weak-sighted and will be fickle-minded, due to 
mental delusion; if in Nritya Lips, will be righteous, extremely opulent, honoured by the 
king and brave, heroic in the field of war; if in Kautuk, will be endowed with lands and 
wealth, will be happy, endowed with pleasures through charming females and learned in 
poetry, arts etc.; if in Nidr, will be rich, endowed with charming virtues and valorous, 
will destroy even fierce enemies and will be skilful in seeking pleasures through harlots. 


123-134. Effects of Rahu’s Avasthas. If Rahu is in Sayan, the native will experience 
miseries in abundance, but, if Rahu in Sayan is placed in Vrishabh, Mithun, Kanya, or 
Mesh, the native will be endowed with wealth and grains. If Rahu is in Upavesan, the 
native will be distressed, due to ulcers, will be endowed with royal association, be 
highly honourable and ever devoid of financial happiness; if in Netrapani, will be 
troubled by eye diseases, will have fear from wicked people, snakes and thieves and will 
incur financial decline; if in Prakash, will acquire a high position, will perform 
auspicious acts and will obtain elevation of his financial state, will be highly virtuous, a 
chief in the king’s court, charming, like freshly formed clouds (that will cause soon rain) 
and will be very prosperous in foreign places; if in Gaman, will be endowed with 
numerous children, be scholarly, wealthy, charitable and honoured by the king; if in 
Agaman, will be very irritable, bereft of intelligence and wealth, crooked, miserly and 
libidinous; if in Sabh, will be scholarly, miserly and endowed with many virtues, wealth 
and happiness; if in Agam, will be always mentally distressed, will have fear from 
enemies and litigations with enemies, be bereft of his own men, will face financial 
destruction and will be crafty and emaciated; if in Bhojan, will be distressed without 
food and dull-witted, will not be bold in his acts and will be bereft of conjugal and 
progenic happiness; if in Nritya Lips, will contract a serious disease, which seems 
difficult to subdue, will have afflicted eyes and will have fear from enemies, will decline 
financially and righteously; if in Kautuk, will be devoid of a position (place), be 
interested in others’ females and will steal others’ wealth; if in Nidr, will be a repository 
of virtues, will be endowed with wife and children, be bold, proud and very affluent. 


135-146. Effects of Ketu’s Avasthas. If Ketu is in Sayan in Mesh, Vrishabh, Mithun, or 
Kanya, there will be plenty of wealth; if Ketu is in Sayan in other Rasis, increased 
diseases will follow. If Ketu is in Upavesan, the native will suffer from ulcers and will 
have fear from enemies, windy diseases, snakes and thieves. Should Ketu be in 
Netrapani, the native will contract eye diseases and will have fear from wicked people, 
snakes, enemies and people of royal family. If Ketu is in Prakash, the native will be 
wealthy and righteous, will live in foreign places, be enthusiastic and genuine and will 
serve the king; if in Gaman, will be endowed with many sons and abundant wealth, be 
scholarly, virtuous, charitable and excellent among men; if in Agaman, will incur many 


diseases, will face loss of wealth, will hurt (others) with his teeth (“Danta Ghatin’), be a 
tale bearer and will blame others; if in Sabh, will be garrulous, very proud, miserly, 
licentious and skilful in evil branches of learning; if in Agam, will be a notorious sinner, 
will enter into litigations with his relatives, will be wicked and troubled by diseases and 
enemies; if in Bhojan, will always be distressed with hunger, 


penury and diseases and will roam all over the earth; if in Nritya Lips, will be distressed, 
due to diseases, will have a floral mark on the eye (white of the pupil), will be 
impertinent and wicked and will plan evils; if in Kautuk, will seek union with dancing 
females (prostitutes), will suffer positional displacement, will take to evil paths and will 
roam all over; if in Nidr, will be endowed with wealth and corns, will be virtuous and 
will spend his time sportively. 


147. General Effects (up to Sloka 155). O Brahmin, if a benefic Grah is in Sayan, there 
will be benefic effects at all times, according to the learned. 


148. If a malefic is in Bhojan, everything will be destroyed and there is no need of a 
second thought. 


149. Should a malefic in Yuvati be in Nidr, auspicious effects will follow, provided, that 
there is no Drishti from another malefic. 


150. Declare without a second thought auspicious effects, following the location of a 
malefic in Putr Bhava, but only with Nidr, or in Sayan. 


151. Untimely death, due to royal wrath, will come to pass, if there is a malefic in 
Randhr Bhava in Nidr, or in Sayan. 


152. If in the case of a malefic in Randhr Bhava in Nidr, or Sayan there happens to be a 
benefic Drishti, or the Yuti of a benefic, (untimely) death will be in the river Ganges, i.e. 


Gangetic belt, shrines etc. 


153. If there is a malefic in Karm in Sayan, or Bhojan, the native will face many 
miseries on account of his own deeds. 


154. O excellent of the Brahmins, doubtlessly a Raj Yog will come to pass, if Candr is in 
Karm in Kautuk, or Prakash. 


155. Thus the good and bad effects should be guessed, assessing the strength and 
weakness of the Grahas, concerning all the Bhavas. 


Ch. 46. Dashas of Grahas 


1. Maitreya said. O Venerable Maharishi Parashar! You are omniscient. There is no 
subject, with which you are not conversant. Therefore now please favour me with 
guidance about the different kinds of Dashas (periods) of the various Grahas. 


2-5. Maharishi Parashar replied. O Brahmin! Dashas are of many kinds. Amongst them 
Vimshottari is the most appropriate for the general populace. But the other Dashas, 
followed in special cases, are Astottari, Shodshottari, Dwadashottari, Panchottari, 
Shatabdik, Chaturashiti-sama, Dwisaptati-sama, Shastihayani, Shat-trimshat-sama. Our 
ancients have described these different kinds of Dashas, based on Nakshatras. 


6-11. O Brahmin! Some Maharishis have made a mention of Kala and Chakr Dasha, but 
they have recognized the Kala Chakr Dasha, as supreme. The other kinds of Dashas, 
propagated by the sages, are Char, Sthir, Kendr, Karak, Brahma Grah, Manduk, Shul, 
Yogardh, Drig, 


Trikon, Rasi, Panchswara, Yogini, Pind, Nausargik, Asht Varg, Sandhya, Pachak, Tara 
etc. But in our view all these Dashas are not appropriate. 


Vimshottari 


12-14. Beginning from Kritika, the Lords of Dashas are Strya, Candr, Mangal, Rahu, 
Guru, Sani, Budh, Ketu and Sukr in that order. Thus, if the Nakshatras from Kritika to 
the Janm Nakshatr are divided by nine, the remainder will signify the Lord of the 
commencing Dasha. The remaining Dashas will be of the Grahas in the order, given 
above. In Kali Yuga the natural life-span of a human being is generally taken, as 120 
years. Therefore Vimshottari Dasha is considered to be the most appropriate and the best 
of all Dashas. 


15. The periods of Dashas of Siirya, Candr, Mangal, Rahu, Guru, Sani, Budh, Ketu and 
Sukr are 6, 10, 7, 18, 16, 19, 17, 7 and 20 in that order. 


16. To find out the remainder of the Dasha, operating at the time of birth, first find out 
the expired portion of the Dasha of the concerned Grah. This is done, as follows. 
Multiply the Dasha period of the Grah concerned by the period of the stay of Candr in 
Janm Nakshatr, that has expired and divide that amount by the total period of the stay of 
Candr in that Nakshatr. The figure in years, months etc. so arrived at will be the expired 
period of the Dasha. If this figure is deducted from the total period of the Dasha, we will 
get the balance of Dasha at the time of birth. 


Ashtottari 


17-20. Maharishi Parashar said. O Brahmin, the sages have recommended the adoption 
of Ashtottari, when Rahu not being in Lagn, in any other Kendr, or Trikon to the Lord of 
the Lagn. From 4 Nakshatras from Ardra commences the Dasha of Sirya, from 3 after 
that begins the Dasha of Candr, 4 after that will bring the Dasha of Mangal, 3 after that 
the Lord of Dasha will be Budh, 4 therefrom will have Sani, as the Dasha Lord, 3 
thereafter the Lord will be Guru, Rahu will be the Lord of the Dasha 4 Nakshatras after 
that and then Sukr will take over the lordship of the Dasha 3 Nakshatras from the last 
one mentioned above. The Lord of the Dasha at birth will be determined by counting in 
this order up to the Janm Nakshatr. The duration of Ashtottari Dasha for Surya, Candr, 
Mangal, Budh, Sani, Guru, Rahu and Sukr are 6, 15, 8, 17, 10, 19, 12 and 21 in that 
order. Thus in this Dasha system only 8 Grahas play the role of Dasha Lords, Ketu 
having been denied this privilege. 


21-22. The Dashas of the various Grahas have been specified above. In the case of 
malefic Grahas the Dasha span of one Nakshatr is '4 of the Dasha of the Grah. It is 1/3rd 
in the case of benefics. Thus the expired portion of the Dasha is calculated, according to 
the method, followed for Vimshottari Dasha, by multiplying the Bhayat, 1.e. the expired 
period of the stay of Candr in the Janm Nakshatr, by the Dasha portion of the Janm 
Nakshatr and dividing it by Bhabhog, 1.e. the total period of the stay of Candr in the 
Janm Nakshatr. Then the balance of Dasha at birth can also be ascertained. If 
Uttarashadha happens to be the Janm Nakshatr, the duration of its first three Padas is 
taken, as Bhabhog and the Dasha calculations should be done accordingly. The Dasha 
and calculations for Abhijit Nakshatr are done by taking the 4th Pad of Uttarashadha 
plus the 15th part of the beginning of Shravan. For Shravan the Bhabhog would be the 
total of its duration in Ghatikas minus the 1/15th part of the beginning of Shravan. 


Shodshottari 


23. It will be advisable to adopt the Shodshottar1, if the birth is in the day in Krishna 
Paksh (dark half of the month), or at night in Shukla Paksh (bright half). 


24-26. The Dasha may be adopted, when the Lagn is in the Hora of Candr with birth in 
the Krishna Paksh, or, when Lagn is in the Hora of Stirya with birth in the Shukla Paksh. 
Count the number of Nakshatras from Pushya to the Janm Nakshatr. Divide this number 
by 8. The remainder will indicate the Dashas of Sirya, Mangal, Guru, Sani, Ketu, Candr, 
Budh and Sukr. The Dashas of the above Grahas are of 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 
years. 


Dwadashottari 


27-28. This Dasha system will be appropriate for one, whose Lagn is in the Navans of 
Sukr. Count from Janm Nakshatr to Revati. Divide this number by 8. The remainder will 


indicate the Dasha of the Grah concerned. The Dasha order is Sirya, Guru, Ketu, Budh, 
Rahu, Mangal, Sani, Candr. The Dashas will be of 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19 and 21 years 
of the Grahas. 


Panchottari 


(29-30) This Dasha is considered suitable for those, whose Lagn is Kark and also in the 
Kark Dvadashans. Count from Anuradha up to the Janm Nakshatr and divide the number 
by 7. The remainder will indicate the Dasha. The order of the Dasha Lords is Surya, 
Budh, Sani, Mangal, Sukr, Candr and Guru. The Dashas of the Grahas are 12, 13, 14, 15, 
16, 17 and 18 years. 


Shatabdik 


(31-32) This Dasha system has been considered appropriate, if Lagn is Vargottama. This 
happens, when Lagn in the Rasi Kundali and the Navans Lagn are in the same RAasi. 


(33-34) Count from Revati to the Janm Nakshatr and divide this number by seven. The 
remainder will indicate the Lords of Dashas in this order: Stirya, Candr, Sukr, Budh, 
Guru, Mangal and Sani. Their Dashas will be of 5, 5, 10, 10, 20, 20 and 30 years. 


Chaturashiti-sama 


35-36. Chaturashiti-sama Dasha is considered appropriate in cases, where the Karm’s 
Lord is placed in Karm. Count from Swati to the Janm Nakshatr and divide this number 
by 7. The remainder will indicate the Dasha Lords in the following order: Siirya, Candr, 
Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr and Sani. The Dasha period of each Grah is 12 years. 


Dwisaptati-sama 

37-39. This Dasha system is considered suitable in cases, where the Lord of Lagn is in 
Lagn, or in Yuvati. Count from Mul to the Janm Nakshatr and divide the number by 8. 
The remainder will determine the Dasha Lords in the following order: Surya, Candr, 


Mangal, 


Budh, Guru, Sukr, Sani and Rahu. In this Dasha system all the eight Grahas have Dashas 
of 9 years each. 


Shastihayani 


40-41. This Dasha may be adopted in cases, where Surya is posited in Lagn. The order 
of Dasha Lords in this system is, as follows: Guru, Siirya, Mangal, Candr, Budh, Sukr, 


Sani and Rahu. The following shows the Nakshatras, falling under the various Dasha 
Lords. The Dashas of Guru, Stirya and Mangal are of 10 years. The remaining Grahas 
have Dashas of 6 years each. Guru (Ashvini, Bharani, Kritika, Punarvasu), Strya 
(Rohini, Mrigashira, Ardra, U.Ashadha), Mangal (Pushya, Aslesha, Magha, Revati), 
Candr (P.Phalguni, U.Phalguni, Hast), Budh (Swati, Vishakah, Anuradha), Sukr 
(Jyeshtha, Mul, P.Ashadha), Sani (Abhijit, Shravan, Dhanishtha), Rahu (Shatabhisha, 
P.Bhadra, U.Bhadra). 


Shat-trimshat-sama 


42-43. Count from Shravan to the Janm Nakshatr and divide the number by 8. The 
remainder | etc. will indicate the Dasha Lords, whose order will be, as follows: Candr, 
Surya, Guru, Mangal, Budh, Sani, Sukr and Rahu. Their Dashas will be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 
and 8 years. If the birth is during the day and Lagn is in the Hora of Surya and, if the 
birth is at night and Lagn is in the Hora of Candr, adoption of this system would be 
preferable. 


Kaal 


44-49. 5 Ghatikas before the sight of the semi-disk of the setting Stirya and 5 Ghatikas 
after that and 5 Ghatikas before and after the rising of Stirya, that is 10 Ghatikas in the 
evening and 10 Ghatikas in the morning, respectively. The total period of both these 
Sandhyas (twilight) is said to be 20 Ghatikas. The 20 Ghatikas of the night have been 
given the name Purna and the 20 Ghatikas of the day have been given the name 
Mugdha. The Sandhya at the time of sunrise is called Khanda and the Sandhya at the 
time of sunset is said to be Sudh. Both of these Sandhyas are of 10 Ghatikas each. If the 
birth is in Purna, or Mugdha, its past Ghatikas should be multiplied by 2 and the product 
should be divided by 15. The figure so arrived at should be converted into years, months 
etc. By multiplying it by the serial number of Surya and other Grahas in their normal 
order, we will get the Kaal Dasha of these Grahas. If the birth is during Sandhya, then its 
past Ghatikas should be multiplied by 4 and the product divided by 15. The figure so 
arrived at in terms of years, months etc. should be multiplied by the serial number of 
Surya and the other Grahas to get the Kaal Dasha of all the nine Grahas. 


Chakr 


50-51. If the birth is at night, the Dasha will commence from Lagn R8si. If the birth is 
during the day, the Dasha will start from the Rasi, in which the Lord of Lagn is placed. 
If the birth is during Sandhya, the Dasha will begin from the Rasi of the second Bhava. 
The Dasha of each RAsi is 10 years. As it is the Dasha system of the 12 R4sis in the 
Zodiac, it has been named, as Chakr Dasha. 


Kaal Chakr 


52-53. Maharishi Parashar said. O Brahmin! Now, after making obedience to Lord 
Shiva, I shall describe the Kala Chakr Dasha. Whatever was related by Lord Shiva to 
Goddess Parvati, is being explained by me for the use of sages to be utilized for the 
welfare of the people. 


54-55. By drawing vertical and horizontal lines, prepare 2 Kundalis, Savya and Apsavya, 
of 12 apartments (Kosthas) each. From the second Kostha in each Kundali fix the Rasis 
Mesh, Vrishabh, Mithun, Kark, Simh, Kanya, Tula, Vrischik, Dhanu, Makar, Kumbh, 
Meen. Then Nakshatras may be incorporated in the manner, indicated hereafter. These 
Kundalis, indicative of the 12 Rasis, are called Kala Chakr. 


56-58. Write Ashvini, Bharani and Kritika in the Savya Chakr and Rohini, Mrigashira, 
Ardra in the Apsavya. Then incorporate the three following Nakshatras, Punarvasu, 
Pushya and Aslesha in the Savya and Magha, Purvaphalguni and Uttaraphalguni in the 
Apsavya. Then incorporate the three following, Hast, Chitra and Swati in the Savya and 
Vishakah, Anuradha and Jyeshtha in the Apsavya. Then incorporate Mul, Purvashadha 
and Uttarashadha in the Savya and Shravan, Dhanishtha and Shatabhisha in the 
Apsavya. Finally incorporate the last three Nakshatras, Purvabhadrapad, 
Uttarabhadrapad and Revati in the Savya Chakr. Now there will be 15 Nakshatras in the 
Savya and 12 Nakshatras in the Apsavya, (because for the 12 Rasis there are 12 Padas of 
3 Nakshatras, the Navansas). The Padas of Ashvini, Punarvasu, Hast, Mul, 
Purvabhadrapad, Kritika, Aslesha, Swati, Uttarashadha and Revati of the Savya should 
be reckoned in the same manner, as the Padas of Ashvini. 


59. Now I shall describe in detail, how the Deha and Jiva should be reckoned in the 
Padas (quarters) of the Nakshatras. 


60. In the first Pad of Ashvini Mesh is indicative of Deha (body) and Dhanu is indicative 
of Jiva (life). And the Lords of Mesh, Vrishabh, Mithun, Kark, Simh, Kanya, Tula, 
Vrischik and Dhanu are Lords of the Dashas in the order, as described before. 


61. In the second Pad of Ashvini Makar is Deha and Mithun is Jiva and the Lords of the 
nine Rasis from Makar to Mithun are Lords of the Dashas. 


62. In the third Pad of the ten Nakshatras, beginning from Ashvini, Vrishabh is Deha and 
Mithun is Jiva. The Lords of the Rasis Vrishabh, Mesh, Meen, Kumbh, Makar, Dhanu, 
Mesh, Vrishabh and Mithun are Lords of the Dashas in that order. 


63-64. For the 4th Pad of the 10 Nakshatras, beginning from Ashvini, Kark is Deha and 
Meen is Jiva and the Lords of the nine Rasis from Kark to Meen are the Lords of 


Dashas. 


65. In the four Padas of the 5 Nakshatras, Bharani, Pushya, Chitra, Purvashadha and 
Uttarabhadrapad, Deha and Jiva are the same, as for Bharani. 


66. In the first Pad of Bharani Vrischik is Deha and Meen is Jiva and the Lords of the 
Rasis Vrischik, Tula, Kanya, Kark, Simh, Mithun, Vrishabh, Mesh and Meen are the 
Lords of Dashas in this order. 


67. In the 2nd Pad of Bharani Kumbh is Deha and Kanya is Jiva and the Lords of 
Kumbh, Makar, Dhanu, Mesh, Vrishabh, Mithun, Kark, Simh and Kanya are the Lords 
of Dashas in that order. 


68. In the 3rd Pad of Bharani Tula is Deha and Kanya is Jiva and Lords of the Rasis 
Tula, Vrischik, Dhanu, Makar, Kumbh, Meen, Vrischik, Tula and Kanya are the Dasha 
Lords in this order. 


69. In the 4th Pad of Bharani Kark is Deha and Kumbh is Jiva and the Lords of the Rasis 
Kark, Simh, Mithun, Vrishabh, Mesh, Meen, Kumbh, Makar and Dhanu are the Dasha 
Lords in this order. 


71-72. O Brahmin! I have thus given you the description of Savya Chakr. Now I shall 
give the description of Apsavya Chakr. Prepare a similar chart of 12 apartments and 
from the 2nd apartment onwards place the Rasis from Vrischik onwards in the reverse 
order. In this chart Deha and Jiva would be the same for Rohini, Magha, Vishakah and 
Shravan, as for Rohini. 


73-76. In the first Pad of Rohini Kark is Deha and Dhanu is Jiva. The Lords of the Rasis 
Dhanu, Makar, Kumbh, Meen, Mesh, Vrishabh, Mithun, Simh and Tula will be the 
Dasha Lords in this order. In the 2nd Tula will be Deha and Kanya the Jiva and the 
Lords of the Rasis Kanya, Tula, Vrischik, Meen, Kumbh, Makar, Dhanu, Vrischik and 
Vrischik will be the Dasha Lords. In the 3rd Kumbh will be Deha and Kanya Jiva. The 
Lords of the Rasis Kanya, Simh, Kark, Mithun, Vrishabh, Mesh, Dhanu, Makar and 
Kumbh will be the Dasha Lords. In the 4th Vrischik will be Deha and Meen Jiva and the 
Lords of the Rasis Meen, Mesh, Vrishabh, Mithun, Simh, Kark, Kanya, Tula and 
Vrischik will be the Lords. 


77. In the 4 Padas of the Apsavya Nakshatras Mrigashira, Ardra, Purvaphalguni, 
Uttaraphalguni, Anuradha, Jyeshtha, Dhanishtha and Shatabhisha the Deha and Jiva and 


the Dasha Lords will be the same, as for Mrigashira. 


78-81. In the first Pad of Mrigashira Kark is Deha and Meen is Jiva and the Lords of the 


Rasis Meen, Kumbh, Makar, Dhanu, Vrischik, Tula, Kanya, Simh and Kark will be the 
Dasha Lords in this order. In the 2nd Vrishabh is Deha and Mithun is Jiva and the Lords 
of the Rasis Mithun, Vrishabh, Mesh, Dhanu, Makar, Kumbh, Meen, Mesh and Vrishabh 
will be the Dasha Lords. In the 3rd Makar is Deha and Mithun is Jiva and the Lords of 
the Rasis Mithun, Simh, Kark, Kanya, Tula, Vrischik, Meen, Kumbh and Makar will be 
the Dasha Lords. In the 4th Mesh will be Deha and Dhanu Jiva and the Lords of the 
Rasis Dhanu, Vrischik, Tula, Kanya, Simh, Kark, Mithun, Vrishabh and Mesh will be 
the Dasha Lords. 


82. Maharishi Parashar said. O Brahmin! The description of the Deha and Jiva of the 
Padas of the Apsavya Nakshatras and the Dasha Lords is the same, as narrated by Lord 
Mahadeva to Goddess Parvati. 


83. Maitreya said. O Venerable Maharishi Parashar! Now please guide me about the 
Dasha spans of the Dasha Lords, described by you. Please also demonstrate, how the 
commencement of the Dasha, its expired and the remaining periods at the birth are to be 
calculated. 


84. Maharishi Parashar said. 5, 21, 7,9, 10, 16 and 4 years are the Dasha spans of Strya, 
Candr, Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr and Sani. 


85-86. The span of life of a person is determined from the Padas (Ansas) of the Nakshatr 
at the time of birth, or the time of query and the years allotted to the 9 Rasis, 
commencing from it (the Pad of the Nakshatr). Some sages are of the view, that the 
person will enjoy full span of life (Purna Ayu), if his birth is at the commencement of the 
Padas, will have middle span of 


life (Madhaya Ayu), if the birth is in the middle of the Padas and short span of life 
(‘Alap Ayu’), or will face death-like sufferings, if the birth is at the end of the Padas of 
the Nakshatr. 


87-88. According to this principle, we should be acquainted with the Padas of the 
Nakshatras. Now I shall tell you, how the calculations are made, according to the 
proportion of the Padas of a Nakshatr. The number of Ashvini etc., whichever may be 
the past Nakshatras, should be divided by 3. Thereafter the remainder should be 
multiplied by 4. To the figure so made available the Pad of the present Nakshatr should 
be added. The product will be the Navans from Mesh onwards. 


89. The number of years (Purna Ayu) are, as under. For the Ans in Mesh 100 years, in 
Vrishabh 85 years, in Mithun 83 years, in Kark 86 years. The number of years will be 
the same for RAsis, situated the 5th and 9th to them. 


90-91. Multiply the past Ghatikas, Palas etc. of the Pad of the Nakshatr, in which a 
person is born, by the existing Dasha years and divide it by 15. The result will indicate 
the expired period of the Dasha in years, months etc. By deducting it from the total 
number of years allotted, we get the balance of Dasha at birth. The Dasha should be 
taken, as commencing from that R4asi. 


92. Multiply the past Ghatikas, Palas etc. of the present Pad of the Nakshatr by the 
number of years and divide the product by the fourth part of Bhabhog. The years etc. so 
obtained may then be deducted from the total Dasha period. The result will be the 
balance of Dasha at birth in years, months etc. 


93. The past Kalas (minutes) of the Navans, in which Candr may be placed, should be 
multiplied by the years, allotted to the Dasha and the product should be divided by 200. 
The resulting years etc. will be the expired portion of the Dasha. By deducting them 
from the total number of years the balance of the Dasha at birth is obtained. 


94-95. In the Savya Chakr the first Ans is called Deha and the last Jiva. The opposite is 
the case in the Apsavya Chakr. Therefore the calculations should be based on the Deha 
etc. in the Savya Chakr and on the Jiva etc. in Apsavya. 


We give below the Savya and Apsavya Kaal Chakr Charts. For Example. The birth is in 
Mrigashira 4th Pad. It is in the Apsavya Kaal Chakr. The Lord of Deha is Mangal and 
that of Jiva is Guru. The Bhabhog of Mrigashira is 59/31 (59 Ghatikas 31 Palas) and 
Bhayat is 58/15 (58 Ghatikas 15 Palas). ‘4 of the Bhabhog comes to 14/52/44. That 
would be the value of one Pad. Multiplying this by 3 will get Ghatikas of 3 Padas, 
namely 44/38/15. Deducting this from Bhayat, the past Ghatikas, Palas etc. of the 4th 
Pad will be 13/36/45. The full Dasha years are 100. Multiplying this by 13/36/45 we get 
1300/3600/4500 = 1361/15. This divided by 15 will give the expired period at birth, 
namely 90 years and 9 months. See the Kaal Chakr. There we count from Jiva etc. to 
Deha. In the 4th Pad of Mrigashira Jiva is in Dhanu and Deha in Mesh. Therefore, by 
deducting the total of years from Dhanu to Mithun, namely 77, from 90 years 9 months, 
we get the expired period of Vrishabh, namely 13 years and 9 months. By deducting this 
from the present 16 years of Sukr, we will get 2 years and 3 months, as the balance of 
Dasha at birth. Accordingly, like Vimshottari Dasha, the order of Dasha will be 
Vrishabh, Mesh, Dhanu, Vrischik etc. 


For Example. Suppose, that at the time of birth of a person in Kritika Nakshatr the 
longitude of Candr (Candr Spast) is 1r4°50’. This converted into Kalas will be 2090 at 
birth. The Dasha should be taken, as commencing from that. Divide the Kalas by 800 (1 
Nakshatr). The result will be the 2nd Nakshatr, namely Bharini and the remainder will 
be 490. These will be the past Kalas of Kritika. There are 200 Kalas in one Pad 
(Navans). Divide 490, the past Kalas of Kritika, by 200. We will then get 2, as past 


Padas and the remainder 90 will represent the past Kalas of the present Nakshatr. By 
multiplying this by 83, the Dasha years, we will get 7470, which, divided by 200, will 
indicate the expired portion of the Dasha, as 37 years, 4 months and 6 days. By 
deducting the years of Dehans, commencing from Vrishabh, in the order Vrishabh, 
Mesh, Meen, Kumbh (16+7+10+4 = 37), we will get 0 years, 4 months and 6 days. This 
will be the expired portion of Makar. Deducting this from 4, the Dasha period of Makar, 
we get the balance of the Dasha of Makar, namely 3 years, 7 months and 24 days. See in 
this connection the Savya Kaal Chakr. 


Gati of Rasis in the Kaal Chakr 


96-98. There are three kinds of movements (Gati) of the Rasis in the Kaal Chakr, namely 
Manduki, Markati and Simhavlokan. The movement of one Rasi by jumping over one 
Rasi is known, as Manduki Gati. Backward movement to the previous RAsi 1s called 
Markati Gati. The movement of a R4si to the Sth and 9th RAsi is said to be Simhavlokan. 


99-100. Movement from Kanya to Kark and from Simh to Mithun is Manduki Gati. 
Movement from Simh to Kark is Markati Gati. Movement from Meen to Vrischik and 
from Dhanu to Mesh is called Simhavlokan Gati. 


Effects of Dashas of Rasis, as a Result of these Gati 


101-102. The effects of the Dasha of the Rasis with Manduki Gati in the Savya Chakr 
are distress to friends, relations, parents and elders and there is likely to be cause for 
trouble from poison, weapons, thieves and enemies. In the Manduki Dasha of the Gati of 
a Rasi from Simh to Mithun there is the likelihood of the death of the mother, or self, 
trouble from Government and possibility of brain fever. 


103. The effects of the Dasha of Rasi with Markati Gati in the Savya Chakr are loss of 
wealth, agricultural products and animals, death of father, or an elderly close relation 
and feeling of lethargy. 


104-105. The effects of the Dasha of the Rasis with Simhavlokan Gati in the Savya 
Chakr are possibility of injury from animals, loss of amity with friends, distress to near 
relations, drowning in a well, fall from animals, possibility of harm from poison, 
weapons and diseases and destruction of residential dwelling. 


106-108. In the Dasha of the Rasis with the Manduki Gati in the Apsavya Chakr the 
effects will be distress to wife and conditions, loss of children, possibility of feverish 
conditions and loss of position. In the Dasha of the Rasis with the Markati Gati there 
may be danger from watery places, loss of position, distress from father, punishment 
from Government and wandering in the forests; with the Simhavlokan there may be 


destruction of the dwelling and death of father etc. 


109-111. If the movement is from Meen to Vrischik, the native may suffer from fever; if 
from Kanya to Kark, there may be loss of brothers and kinsmen; if from Simh to 
Mithun, there may be ill health of the wife; if from Simh to Kark, the native may die; if 
from Dhanu to Mesh, there may be death of uncles and similar relations. If the Rasi is 
yuti with a malefic, adverse conditions may be expected in the Dasha of the Rasi. 
Favourable effects will be felt in its Dasha, if the Rasi is yuti with a benefic. 


112-113. O Brahmin! In the Kaal Chakr Dasha favourable and unfavourable effects may 
be predicted, after taking into account the directions of the Rasis and Grahas. 


114-119. If the movement is from Kanya to Kark, good results are realized in places, 
located in the East and at that time journeys to the places in the North prove fruitful. 
Unfavourable effects will be felt in places, located in the West and the South. It will be 
advisable not to undertake journeys in those directions in the Dasha of these RAsis. If the 
movement is from Simh to Mithun, no journey should be undertaken to places, located 
in the East. However, the journeys to the South-West will prove fruitful in the Dasha of 
those Rasis. If the movement is from Kark to Simh, journeys during that period to the 
South will prove unfavourable and result in loss and the native has to return from the 
South to the West. If the movement is from Meen to Vrischik, there will distress, if the 
native goes to the North. The same would happen, if the movement is from Dhanu to 
Makar. There may be ill health, imprisonment, or death, if the movement is from Dhanu 
to Mesh. There may be gains, comforts and property and marriage, if the movement is 
from Dhanu to Vrischik. It will not be advisable to undertake journeys to the West 
during the related period, if the movement is from Simh to Kark. Favourable results 
should be predicted, if the Rasis are yuti with benefics and adverse, if the R&sis are yuti 
with malefics. 


120-122. According to the above-mentioned Kaal Chakr, the person, born in the Ansas 
of the various RAasis, will be, as under. Mesh Ans brave and a thief, Vrishabh wealthy, 
Mithun learned, Kark king, Simh respected by king, Kanya learned, Tula minister, or 
adviser, Dhanu sinful, Kumbh businessman, Meen wealthy. 


123-128. If the Deha, or Jiva Rasis are yuti with Strya, Mangal, Sani, or Rahu, the 
native will die. Worse results may be expected, if the Deha and Jiva Rasis are yuti with 
two, or all of them. If there is a malefic in Deha RAsi, the native suffers ill health; a 
malefic in a Jiva Rasi will make the native very timid. If the Deha and/or Jiva R4si are 
yuti with two malefics, there will be distress and diseases. Three malefics in the Deha 
and/or Jiva Rasi will cause premature death. Four malefics in the Deha and Jiva Rasi 
will cause definite death. If both the Deha and Jiva Rasis are occupied by malefics, there 
will be fear from king and thieves and death of the native. If Stirya is in the Deha, or 


Jiva Rasi, there will be danger from fire. Candr in the Deha, or Jiva Rasi will cause 
danger from water, Mangal fear from weapons, Budh fear from windy troubles, Sani 
fear from Gulma (a disease), Rahu and Ketu fear from poison. If the Deha, or Jiva Rasis 
are occupied by Budh, Guru and Sukr, the native will be wealthy, will enjoy all kinds of 
comforts and will have good health. Mixed results may be expected, if the Deha and Jiva 
Rasis are occupied by both benefics and malefics. 


129-130. In the Dasha of the Rasis, owned by malefics, the body and soul will be in 
distress. The effects will be favourable in the Dasha of the Rasis, owned by benefics. Ifa 
malefic Rasi is occupied by a benefic Grah, or, if a benefic RAsi is occupied by a malefic 
Grah, the effects will be of a mixed nature. 


Effects of Kaal Chakr Dasha of the Rasis in Lagn and other Bhavas. 


131-132. In the Kaal Chakr Dasha of the Rasi in Lagn the body remains healthy and the 
native spends a life with many kinds of comforts. If the Lagn R&si is a benefic one, the 
good effects are realized fully. If the Lagn R&si is a malefic Rasi, there is likelihood of ill 
health. If a Grah in exaltation, or in its own Rasi occupies Lagn, the native is respected 
by the king, or government and acquires wealth. 


133-134. In the Chakr Dasha of the R&si in Dhan the native receives good food, enjoys 
happiness of wife and children, gains wealth, achieves progress in the educational 
sphere, becomes a clever conversationalist and moves in good society. If the Rasi be a 
benefic, good effects are realized in full, otherwise the effects would be of a mixed 
nature. 


135-136. Happiness from co-borns, valour, patience, comforts, acquisition of gold, 
ornaments and clothes and recognition by the king, or government, are the effects in the 
Kaal Chakr Dasha of the Rasi in Sahaj. If the R&si is a benefic, the good results are 
realized in full, otherwise adverse effects may also be experienced. 


137-138. Good relations with kinsmen, acquisition of land, houses, or a kingdom, 
conveyances and clothes and enjoyment of sound health, are the effects of the Chakr 
Dasha of the Rasi in Bandhu. If the Rasi is a benefic one, the good effects are realized in 
full. If it is a malefic Rasi, adverse results are also experienced. 


139-140. Being blessed with wife and children, favours from Government, enjoyment of 
sound health, good relations with friends, achievement of fame, good progress in the 
educational sphere, patience and valour are the effects of the Chakr Dasha of the Rasi in 
Putr. If the Rasi is a benefic one, the good results are enjoyed in full. If the Rasi is a 
malefic one, adverse effects are also experienced. 


141-142. Danger from the king, fire and weapons and the possibility of suffering from 
diabetes, Gulma and jaundice are the effects in the Chakr Dasha of the Rasi in Ari. If the 
Rasi is a malefic one, the above adverse effects will be experienced in full. There will be 
some mitigation of the evil effects in the case of a benefic Rasi. 


143-144. Marriage, conjugal happiness, being blessed with children, gain of agricultural 
products, cows and clothes, favours and recognition from the king and achievement of 
fame, are the effects in the Chakr Dasha of the Rasi in Yuvati. The beneficial results will 
be experienced in full, if the R&si is a benefic one. Meagre good effects will be realized 
in the case of a malefic Rasi. 


145-146. Destruction of a residential house, distress, loss of wealth, poverty and danger 
from enemies are the effects of the Chakr Dasha of the Rasi in Randhr. The adverse 
effects will be realized in full, if the Rasi is a malefic one. Some mitigation in evil 
effects may be expected in the case of a benefic RAsi. 


(147-157) ... 
...Char 


158-166. Now I will tell you about the working out of the Dasha years of Vrischik and 
Kumbh. If both the Lords of the two Rasis, Vrischik and Kumbh, are placed in their own 
Rasis, their Dasha will be of 12 years. Otherwise the Dasha will be of the number of 
years, indicated by the number, counted from that R4si to the Rasi, occupied by its Lord. 
If one Grah be in his own RAsi and the other in any other Rasi, the Dasha will be of the 
number of years counted, from the above first RAsi to the other. If the Lords are in 
different Rasis, the counting is to be done up to the Rasi, which is stronger. The Rasi, 
which has a Grah, placed in it, is considered more powerful than the Rasi without a Grah 
in it. If both are with Grahas in them, the one with more Grahas would be considered 
more powerful. If both Rasis are occupied by an equal number of Grahas, the strength of 
the Rasi itself should be taken into account. The principle for considering the Bal of the 
Rasi is, that the Fixed Rasi is considered stronger than the Movable one and the Dual 
Rasi is considered more powerful than the Fixed Rasi. If there is equality in the strength 
of the Rasis, then to determine the number of years of Dasha counting should be done up 
to the Rasi with bigger number. If one Rasi is occupied by a Grah in exaltation, the 
counting should be done up to that Rasi only. In addition 1 should be added in the 
number of years in the case of a Rasi with an exalted Grah and 1 should be deducted 
from the number of years in the case of a Rasi with a Grah in debilitation. The prediction 
should be made after calculating the Dashas in this manner. 


167. If the Rasi in Dharm Bhava is in an odd Pad, the counting should be from the Rasi 
in the Lagn onwards. The counting would be in the reverse order, if the Pad is even. The 


Dashas of Rasis have to be fixed, keeping this in view. 


For Example. In the above Tula is the Rasi in Dharm Bhava in an odd Pad. Amongst the 
Lords of Lagn, Sani and Rahu, Rahu is associated with a Grah. Therefore Rahu is more 
powerful than, Sani. Therefore counting should be done up to Rahu. Kumbh is in even 
Pad, therefore counting has to be done from Kumbh up to Rahu in the reverse order, by 
which the Char Dasha for Kumbh would come to 8 years. Mesh is in odd Pad. Therefore 
the Char Dasha for Mesh will be one year. The Dasha of other Rasis should be 
calculated in the same manner. 


Sthir 


168-169. Maharishi Parashar said. Now I am going to describe the Sthir Dasha. In this 
Dasha system 7, 8 and 9 years are the Dasha spans of the Movable (Char), Fixed (Sthir) 
and Dual (Dvisva Bhava) RAsis. In this system the Dasha of the 12 Rasis begins from 
the Brahm Grah Ashrit Rasi. The Dashas are counted onwards from the odd RAsis and in 
the reverse order from the even RAsis. 


170-173. Maitreya said. O great Sage! Now please enlighten me how the Brahm Grah is 
picked out in a chart. Maharishi Parashar said. From amongst the Lords of Ari, Randhr 
and Vyaya the Grah, who may possess the greatest strength and is placed in Lagn, or in 
Yuvati with strength, the one, placed in an odd RAsi within sixth Bhava from the Bhava 
concerned, is called the Brahm Grah. The Lord of Randhr in Randhr is also accepted, as 
Brahm Grah. If Sani, or Rahu/Ketu obtain Brahmatva (qualifications of Brahm Grah), 
they become Brahm Grah. If a number of Grahas obtain Brahmatva, the one with the 
largest number of degrees would become Brahm Grah. If there is parity in the degrees of 
such Grahas, the most powerful amongst them would become Brahm Grah. 


Yogardha 


174. The spans of Dashas of the R4sis in the Yogardha Dasha system are half of the total 
of the spans of Char and Sthir Dashas. The Dasha will commence from the Rasi of Lagn, 
or Yuvati, whichever is stronger. The order of the Dashas of the 12 Rasis will be counted 
onwards, if the opening Dasha R&si is an odd one. If it be an even RAsi, the Dashas will 
be in reverse order. 


Kendradi 


175-176. In this system there are Dashas of Fixed Rasis in the Kendr etc. from Lagn, or 
from Yuvati, whichever is stronger. If Lagn, or Yuvati with strength is placed in an odd 
Rasi, the Kendr etc. are counted in the onward order. If it be in an even RAsi, the 
counting will be in the backward, or reverse order. In them also the Dashas would be in 


the order of comparative strength of the Rasis. The order of Dashas would be the same, 
as reckoned from the Atma Karak. The spans of Dashas would be the same, as they are 
in the Char Dasha. In calculating the years of Dashas of Grahas, counting is done from 
the Grah to his own Rasi. The years of Dashas would be the number, arrived at by 
counting up to the Rasi of the Grah, which is stronger, or more in number. 


177. If a Grah owns two Rasis, the Dasha years will be equal to the number, which is 
greater, when counted from the Rasi, occupied by him. 


Notes. Under this system Dashas are of two kinds, namely Lagn Kendradi and Atma 
Karak Kendradi. There are also Kendradi Rasi Dasha, or Kendradi Grah Dasha in both 
the Dasha systems, mentioned above. 


Karak 


178. The system, under which the first Dasha is of the Atma Karak and the subsequent 
Dashas are of the remaining 7 Karakas in their order is known, as Karak Dasha. In this 
system the Dasha years are equal to the number of Rasis, counted from Lagn up to the 
Karak concerned. 


Manduk 


179-180. Under the Manduk Dasha system the Dasha commences from Lagn, or Yuvati 
Bhava, whichever is stronger. If the Rasi of commencement is an odd RAsi, the Dashas 
of 3 Movable, 3 Fixed and 3 Dual Rasis will be counted in the onwards order. They will 
be in the reverse order in the case of an even R&si. In this system the Dasha years will be 
the same, as in Sthir Dasha. In this system every Dasha is of the next 3rd Rasi. 


Shula 


181-182. Some sages have designed the Shula Dasha for determining the time of death. 
In this system the Dasha commences from Dhan, or Randhr, whichever is stronger. If the 
Rasi is an odd one, the order of the Dasha Rasis will be onwards. It will be backwards in 
the case of an even Rasi. The Dasha years in this system are, as adopted for the Sthir 
Dasha. There is a possibility, that death appears in the Dasha of the Marak Rasi, which 
has greater strength. 


Trikon 
183-184. In this system the first Dasha commences from the strongest amongst the Rasis 


in Kon (Trikon) to Lagn (Tanu, Putr and Dharm). This system is similar to the Char 
Dasha. Here also the Dashas of the Rasis will be in the onwards order in the case of odd 


Rasis and in the reverse order in the case of even Rasis. The Dasha years will be similar 
to that of Char Dasha. It has been named Trikon because of the commencement of the 
Dasha from the R&aSis in Konas. 


Dirga 


185-187. In this system the order of the Dashas is, as follows: the Rasi, occupying 
Dharm, the RAsis, receiving a Drishti from the Rasi in Dharm, the Rasi in Karm, the 
Rasis, receiving a Drishti from the Rasi in Karm, the Rasi in Labh and the Rasis, 
receiving a Drishti from the Rasi in Labh. As this system is mostly based on Drishtis, it 
has been named, as Dirga Dasha. Three different processes are adopted for the Movable, 
Fixed and Dual Rasis from Dharm, Karm and Labh. According to them, Rasi, which 
receives a Drishti from the Movable R&si, is counted backwards and the R&asi, receiving 
a Drishti from the Fixed R4asi, is counted onwards. In the case of the Dual Rasi, if it is 
odd, the counting is onwards and the order is backwards in case of an even RAsi for the 
Rasis, receiving a Drishti. 


Notes. The intention is, that from the point of view of Drishti the process of Rasi, 
receiving a Drishti, should be started from the Rasi, which is nearest. In this connection 
readers may refer to Rasi Drishtikathan Adhyaya, Ch. 8, Verse 9 and the table after that. 


Lagnadi Rasi Dasha 


188-189. In this system there are Dashas of all the 12 Rasis, including Lagn, in every 
Nakshatr. Consequently the Bhayat at birth may be multiplied by 12 and then the 
product should be divided by Bhabhog. The R&si, degree etc. so available may be added 
to the longitude of Lagn. From the Rasi, becoming available by doing so, will start the 
Dashas of the 12 Rasis. (If that Rasi is odd, the counting will be onwards. It will be in 
the reverse order, if the Rasi is even) 


190. For finding the balance of Dasha at birth, multiply the expired degree etc. by the 
Dasha years of the first Dasha Rasi and divide it by 30. The years etc. so arrived at may 
be deducted from the Dasha years. The result will indicate the balance of Dasha at birth 
in years, months etc. 


Panch Swar Dasha 


191-194. Beginning from Akaradhi 5 Swaras (a, 1, u, e, 0), write underneath them the 


CMD. 6 


Varnas in 6 lines. Leave out the letters ‘a’, ‘fia’ and ‘na’, because they are not used in 
names. If they are found in any name, ‘ga’ may be substituted for ‘na’, ‘ja’ for ‘fia’ and 
‘da’ for ‘na’ for working out the Dashas and making predictions. In this manner the 


Swar, under which the first Varna of the name of the native is found, will determine the 


order of the Dashas of the five Swaras. Dashas are of 12 years for all the five Swaras. In 
the Dasha of every Swar there will be Antar Dashas of all the five Swaras in the same 
order. 


Yogini 


195-199. Maharishi Parashar said. O Brahmin! I have already given you the description 
of Panch Swar Dasha. Now I will acquaint you with the Yogini Dasha, as described by 
Lord Mahadeva. There are 8 Yoginis, namely Mangal, Pingal, Dhanya, Bhramari, 
Bhadrika, Ulka, Siddha and Sankat. 


Candr, Sirya, Guru, Mangal, Budh, Sani, Sukr and Rahu are born from them. Add 3 to 
the Janm Nakshatr and divide it by 8. The remainder will indicate the Yogini Dasha of 
Mangal, etc. The Dashas are of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 years. The balance of Dasha at 
birth should be worked out from the Bhayat and Bhabhog etc., as already explained 
earlier. 


Pind, Ans and Nisarg 


201-202. The Pind, Ans and Nisarg Dasha will be the same, as Pindayu, Ansayu and 
Nisargayu, the method of determination of which has already been explained previously. 
The order of Dashas will be, as follows. The first will be of Lagn, Stirya, or Candr, 
whoever is stronger. The subsequent Dashas will be of Grahas in Kendr to them, then of 
Grahas in Panaphara Bhavas and lastly in Apoklima Bhavas. The Dashas and Antar 
Dashas of Lagn and the seven Grahas will also be in the same order. 


203. The effects of these Dashas will be in accordance with Ashtak Varg Bal, which 
subject will be dealt with later. These Dashas are also called Ashtak Varg Dashas. 


Sandhya 


204. Sandhya is the Dvadashans Ayurdaya of the Param Ayurdaya (maximum possible 
life-span). In Sandhya Dasha the Dasha of all the Rasis from Lagn onwards is of 1/12 
the years of Param Ayurdaya. 


Pachak Dasha in Sandhya Dasha 


205-206. By multiplying the Dasha years of Sandhya Dasha by 6 and dividing the 
product by 31, the years, months etc. so arrived at may be put in one apartment of a 
Table. Thereafter half of these years, months etc. may be written in the next three 
apartments. The remaining 8 apartments may be filled in by one third of the aforesaid 
years, months etc. In this manner Pachak Dasha in Sandhya Dasha of every Bhava can 


be worked out and predictions may be made from it. 
Tar 


207-209. O Brahmin! Some sages have given consideration to Tar Dasha, which is like 
Vimshottari. In this Dasha Janm, Sampat etc. in their order replace Surya, Candr etc., 
placed in Kendras. This Dasha is applied in those cases only, where there are Grahas in 
Kendras. If there are a number of Grahas, the first Dasha will belong to the strongest 
amongst them. 


210. O Brahmin! I have now completed the description of the different kinds of Dashas. 
I will give the description of their Antar Dashas (sub-periods) later. 


Ch. 47. Effects of Dashas 


1. Maitreya said. O Maharishi Parashar! You have told me about the different kinds of 
Dashas. Now be kind enough to enlighten me with the effects of Dashas. 


2. Maharishi Parashar replied. O Brahmin! There are two kinds of effects of Dashas: 
general and distinctive. The natural characteristics of the Grahas cause the general 
effects and the distinctive effects are realized by their placements etc. 


3-4. The effects of the Dashas of the Grahas are in accordance with their strength. The 
effects of a Grah in the first Dreshkan are realized at the commencement of the Dasha. 
The Grah in the second Dreshkan makes its effects felt in the middle of the Dasha. The 
effects of the Grah in the third Dreshkan are experienced at the end of the Dasha. If the 
Grah is retrograde, these effects would be in the reverse order. The Dasha effects of 
Rahu and Ketu, who are always retrograde, will always be realized in the reverse order. 


5-6. The effects are favourable, if at the commencement of the Dasha the Dasha Lord is 
in Lagn, in his exaltation, own, or a Shant Rasi. The results are unfavourable, if the 
Dasha Lord is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, in his debilitation, or in an inimical Rasi. 


7-11. During the Dasha of Siirya there is acquisition of wealth, great felicity and honours 
from the Government, if at the time of birth Siirya is in his own R&asi, in his exaltation 
Rasi, in a Kendr, in Labh, be associated with the Lord of Dharm, or the Lord of Karm 
and strong in his Varg. The native will be blessed with a son (children), if Surya is with 
the Lord of Putr. The native will acquire elephants and other kinds of wealth, if Stirya is 
associated with the Lord of Dhan. The native will enjoy comforts of conveyances, if 
Surya is associated with the Lord of Bandhu. He attains a high position, like that of 
Army Chief, by the beneficence of the king and enjoys all kinds of happiness. Thus 
during the Dasha of a strong (and favourable) Surya there are acquisitions of clothes, 


agricultural products, wealth, honours, conveyances etc. 


12-15. During the Dasha of Siirya there will be anxieties, loss of wealth, punishment 
from Government, defamation, opposition by kinsmen, distress to father, (in)auspicious 
happenings at home, distress to paternal and maternal uncles etc., anxiety and inimical 
relations with other people for no reason whatsoever, should Strya be in his Rasi of 
debilitation, be weak in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, or be associated with malefic Grahas, or 
with the Lord of Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya. There will be some favourable effects at times, 
if in the above situations Surya receives a Drishti from benefic Grahas. The effects will 
always be unfavourable, when malefic Grahas give a Drishti to Siirya. 


16-22. O Brahmin! After describing the effects of the Dasha of Surya in brief, I will now 
come to the effects of Vimshottari Dasha of Candr. During the Dasha of Candr from its 
commencement to the end there will be opulence and glory, good fortune, gain of 
wealth, auspicious functions at home, dawn of fortune, attainment of a high position in 
Government, acquisition of conveyances, clothes, birth of children and acquisition of 
cattle, should Candr be in her exaltation, in her own R4@si, in Kendr, in Labh, Dharm, or 
Putr, be associated with, or receives a Drishti from benefics, be fully powerful and is 
associated with the Lord of Karm, Dharm, or Bandhu. There will be extraordinary gains 
of wealth and luxuries, if such a Candr is in Dhan Bhava. 


23-26. Should Candr be waning, or in her debilitation Rasi, there will be loss of wealth 
in her Dasha. If Candr is in Sahaj, there will be happiness off and on. If Candr is 
associated with malefics, there will be idiocy, mental tension, trouble from employees 
and mother and loss of 


wealth. If waning Candr is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, or is associated with malefics, there 
will be inimical relations with Government, loss of wealth, distress to mother and 
similar evil effects. If a strong Candr is placed in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya there will be 
troubles and good times off and on. 


27-32. If Mangal is in his exaltation, in his Multrikon, in his own Rasi, in Kendr, in 
Labh, or Dhan Bhava with strength, in a benefic Ans (Navans) and is associated with a 
benefic, there will be during his Dasha acquisition of kingdom (attainment of a high 
administrative, or political position in Government, gain of wealth and land, recognition 
by Government), gain of wealth from foreign countries and acquisition of conveyances 
and ornaments. There will also be happiness and good relations with co-borns. If 
Mangal with strength is placed in a Kendr, or in Sahaj, there will be gain of wealth 
through valour, victory over enemies, happiness from wife and children. There will, 
however, be a possibility of some unfavourable effects at the end of the Dasha. 


33. If Mangal is in his debilitation Rasi, weak, in an inauspicious Bhava, or is associated 


with, or receives a Drishti from malefics, there will be in his Dasha loss of wealth, 
distress and similar unfavourable effects. 


34-39’. In order to clarify the effects of the Dasha of Rahu I shall first mention the 
exaltation and debilitation Rasis of Rahu and Ketu. The exaltation Rasi of Rahu is 
Vrishabh. The exaltation Rasi of Ketu is Vrischik. The Multrikonas of Rahu and Ketu 
are Mithun and Dhanu. The own Rasis of Rahu and Ketu are Kumbh and Vrischik. Some 
sages have expressed the view, that Kanya is the own R&asi of Rahu and Meen is the own 
Rasi of Ketu. Should Rahu be in his exaltation Rasi etc., there will be during the Dasha 
of Rahu great happiness from acquisition of wealth, agricultural products etc., 
acquisition of conveyances with the help of friends and Government, construction of a 
new house, birth of sons (children), religious inclinations, recognition from Government 
of foreign countries and gain of wealth, clothes etc. If Rahu be associated with, or 
receives a Drishti from benefics, be in a benefic Rasi and be in Tanu, Bandhu, Yuvati, 
Karm, Labh, or Sahaj, there will be during his Dasha all kinds of comforts by the 
beneficence of the Government, acquisition of wealth through a foreign Government, or 
sovereign and felicity at home. 


40-43. If Rahu is in Randhr, or Vyaya Bhava, there will be during his Dasha all kinds of 
troubles and distress. If Rahu is associated with a malefic, or a Marak Grah, or is in his 
debilitation Rasi, there will be loss of position, destruction of his residential house, 
mental agony, trouble to wife and children and misfortune of getting bad food. There 
will be loss of wealth at the commencement of the Dasha, some relief and gain of wealth 
in his own country and distress and anxieties during the last portion of the Dasha. 


44. Now I am going to describe the effects of the Dasha of Guru, the great benefic and 
preceptor of the Gods. 


45-48. If Guru is in his exaltation, his own Rasi, his Multrikon, in Karm, Putr, or Dharm 
Bhava, in his own Navans, or in his exalted Navans, there will be during his Dasha: 
acquisition of kingdom, great felicity, recognition by Government, acquisition of 
conveyances and clothes, devotion to deities and Brahmins, happiness in respect of his 
wife and children and success in the performance of religious sacrifices (oblations). 


49-51. If Guru is in his debilitation Rasi, combust, associated with malefics, or in Ari, or 
Randhr, there will be during his Dasha loss of residential premises, anxiety, distress to 
children, loss of cattle and pilgrimage. The Dasha will give some unfavourable effects at 
its commencement only. During the later part of the Dasha there will be good effects, 
like gain of wealth, awards from and recognition by Government. 


52. Now I will describe to you the effects of the Dasha of Sani, who is considered the 
vilest and most inferior amongst all the Grahas. 


53-56. If Sani is in his exaltation, in his own Rasi, or in Multrikon, or friendly Rasi, in 
his own, or exalted Navans and in Sahaj, or Labh, there will be during his Dasha 
recognition by Government, opulence and glory, name and fame, success in the 
educational sphere, acquisition of conveyances and ornaments etc., gain of wealth, 
favours from Government, attainment of a high position, like Commander of an Army, 
acquisition of a kingdom, benevolence of goddess Lakshmi, gain of property and birth 
of children. 


57-60. If Sani is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, in his debilitation Rasi, or combust, there will 
be during his Dasha ill effects from poison, injury from weapons, separation from father, 
distress to wife and children, disaster, as a result of displeasure of Government, 
imprisonment etc. If Sani receives a Drishti from, or is associated with a benefic, is 
placed in a Kendr, or in a Trikon, in Dhanu, or in Meen, there will be acquisition of a 
kingdom, conveyances and clothes. 


61. Now I am going to describe the effects of the Dasha of Budh, who is called a Kumar 
(in his teens) amongst all the Grahas. 


62-65. If Budh is in his exaltation, in his own, in a friendly Rasi, or in Labh, Putr, or 
Dharm, there will be during his Dasha acquisition of wealth, gain of reputation, 
improvement in knowledge, benevolence of Government, auspicious functions, 
happiness from wife and children, good health, availability of sweetish preparations, 
profits in business etc. If Budh receives a Drishti from a benefic, is in Dharm, or is the 
Lord of Karm, the aforesaid beneficial results will be experienced in full and there will 
be great felicity all-round. 


66-70. If Budh is associated with a malefic, there will be during his Dasha punishment 
by Government, inimical relations with kinsmen, journey to a foreign country, 
dependence on others and the possibility of urinary troubles. If Budh is in Ari, Randhr, 
or Vyaya, there will be loss of wealth, due to indulgence in lascivious activities, 
possibility of suffering from rheumatism and jaundice, danger of thefts and malevolence 
of Government, loss of land and cattle etc. At the commencement of the Dasha of Budh, 
there will be gains of wealth, betterment in the educational sphere, birth of children and 
happiness. In the middle of the Dasha, there will be recognition from Government. The 
last part of the Dasha will be distressful. 


71. Now I will tell you about the Dasha of Ketu, who is a headless trunk (Kabandha) 
amongst all the Grahas. 


72-77. If Ketu is in a Kendr, a Trikon, or in Labh, in a benefic R4si, in his exaltation, or 
in his own Rasi, there will be during his Dasha cordial relations with the king, desired 


headship of a country, or village, comforts of conveyances, happiness from children, 
gain from foreign countries, happiness from wife and acquisition of cattle. If Ketu is in 
Sahaj, Ari, or Labh, 


there will be in his Dasha acquisition of a kingdom, good relations with friends and 
opportunities for the acquisition of elephants. At the commencement of the Ketu Dasha 
there will be Raj Yog. During the middle portion of the Dasha there will be possibilities 
of fearfulness and in the last part there will be sufferings from ailments and journeys to 
distant places. If Ketu is in Dhan, Randhr, or Vyaya, or receives a Drishti from a malefic, 
there will be imprisonment, destruction of kinsmen and residential premises and 
anxieties, company of menials and diseases. 


78. Now I will describe the effects of the Dasha of Sukr, who is the incarnate of 
intoxication, ecstasy, delight and pride amongst all the Grahas. 


79-82. If Sukr is in his exaltation, in his own RAsi, or in a Kendr, or a Trikon, there will 
be during his Dasha acquisition of fancy clothes, ornaments, conveyances, cattle and 
land etc., availability of sweet preparations every day, recognition from the sovereign, 
luxurious functions of songs and dances etc. by the benevolence of Goddess Lakshmi. If 
Sukr is in his Multrikon, during his Dasha there will definitely be acquisition of a 
kingdom, acquisition of a house, birth of children and grandchildren, celebration of 
marriage in the family, attainment of a high position, like the Commander of an Army, 
visits of friends, recovery of lost wealth, property, or kingdom. 


83-84". If Sukr is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, there will be during his Dasha inimical 
relations with kinsmen, distress to wife, losses in business, destruction of cattle and 
separation from relations. 


85-87. If Sukr is in Bandhu, as Lord of Dharm, or Karm, there will be during his Dasha 
attainment of rulership of a country, or village, performance of pious deeds, like building 
of reservoirs and temples and giving grains etc. in charity, availability of sweet 
preparations every day, vigor in work, name and fame and happiness from wife and 
children. 


88-89. Similar are the effects of Sukr in his sub-periods. If Sukr is Lord of Dhan, or 
Yuvati, there will be during his Dasha physical pains and troubles. To get alleviation 
from those troubles the native should perform Shatarudriya, or Mrityunjaya Japa in the 
prescribed manner and give in charity a cow, or female buffalo. 


Ch. 48. Distinctive Effects of the Nakshatr Dasha, or of the Dashas of the Lords 
(Vimshottari) of various Bhavas 


1. If the Lord of Karm is placed in an auspicious Bhava in his exaltation Rasi etc., his 
Dasha effects will be favourable. The effects will be adverse, if the Lord of Karm is in 
his debilitation Rasi and occupies an inauspicious Bhava. This proves, that an 
inauspicious Grah in his exaltation Rasi etc. will not produce unfavourable results, if 
placed in an auspicious Bhava and a benefic, being in his debilitation Rasi and being 
placed in an inauspicious Bhava, will produce adverse effects. Now I will describe the 
effects of the Dasha of the Lords of various Bhavas, who are related to each other. 


2-4. There will be physical well-being in the Dasha of the Lord of Lagn, distress and 
possibility of death in the Dasha of the Lord of Dhan, unfavourable effects in the Dasha 
of the Lord of Sahaj, acquisition of house and land in the Dasha of the Lord of Bandhu, 
progress in 


educational sphere and happiness from the children in the Dasha of the Lord of Putr and 
danger from enemies and ill health in the Dasha of the Lord of Ari. 


5-8. There will be distress to wife and the possibility of the death of the native in the 
Dasha of the Lord of Yuvati, the possibility of death and financial losses in the Dasha of 
the Lord of Randhr, improvement in the educational sphere, religious-mindedness and 
unexpected gains of wealth in the Dasha of the Lord of Dharm, recognition from and 
awards by the Government in the Dasha of the Lord of Karm, obstacles in gains of 
wealth and the possibility of diseases in the Dasha of the Lord of Labh and distress and 
danger from diseases in the Dasha of the Lord of Vyaya. A Grah, placed in an auspicious 
Bhava, like Trikon etc., at the commencement of the Dasha, produces favourable results 
in his Dasha. The Grah, placed in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya at that time, yields only adverse 
results during his Dasha. It is therefore essential, that the placement of a Grah at the time 
of birth and at the commencement of the Dasha should both be taken into account for the 
assessment of the Dasha effects. 


14-17'4. The Dasha of Ari’s, Randhr’s, or Vyaya’s Lord also becomes favourable, if they 
get associated with the Lord of a Trikon. If the Lord of a Kendr is in a Trikon, or the 
Lord of a Trikon is in a Kendr, the Dasha of the Grah, yuti with either of them, becomes 
favourable. The Dasha of a Grah, receiving a Drishti from the Lord of a Kendr, or 
Trikon is also favourable. If Dharm’s Lord is in Lagn and Lagn’s Lord is in Dharm, the 
Dashas of both of them will produce extremely beneficial results. There will be 
acquisition of a kingdom in the Dashas of Lagn’s Lord and Karm’s Lord, if Karm’s Lord 
is in Lagn and Lagn’s Lord is in Karm. 


18-20. The Dasha of Sahaj’s, Ari’s and Labh’s Lord, of the Grahas, placed in Sahaj, Ari 
and Labh and of the Grahas, yuti with the above, will prove unfavourable. The Dasha of 
the Grahas, associated with the Lords of Marak Bhavas, namely Dhan and Yuvati, in 
Dhan, or Yuvati and the Dashas of the Grahas, placed in Randhr, will produce 


unfavourable effects. Thus the Dashas should be considered favourable, after taking into 
account the placement of a Grah and his relationship of one Grah with the other. (Rahu 
and Ketu give favourable results in Sahaj, Ari and Labh). 


Ch. 49. Effects of the Kaal Chakr 


1-5. Maharishi Parashar said. O Brahmin! I am now going to describe to you the effects 
of the Kaal Chakr Dasha. 


During the Dasha of the Rasi, owned, or occupied by Surya, there will be ill health, due 
to the blood, or bile troubles; ... Candr, there will be gain of wealth and clothes, name 
and fame and birth of children; ... Mangal, there will be bilious fever, gout and wounds; 
... Budh, there will be acquisition of wealth and birth of children; ... Guru, there will be 
increase in the number of children, acquisition of wealth and enjoyment; ... Sukr, there 
will be acquisition of learning, marriage and gain of wealth; ... occupied by Sani, there 
will be all kinds of adverse happenings. 


The Effects of the Dashas on the Basis of the Navans of each Rasi 


6-7. In the Kaal Chakr Dasha of Mesh in Mesh Navans there will be distress, due to 
troubles, caused by the pollution of blood. In the Dasha of Mesh in the Navans of 
Vrishabh there will be increase in wealth and agricultural product. In the Navans of 
Mithun there will be 


advancement of knowledge. In the Navans of Kark there will be acquisition of wealth, in 
the Simh Navans danger from enemies, in the Kanya distress to wife, in the Tula 
kingship, in the Vrischik death and in the Dhanu acquisition of wealth. Such will be the 
effects of the 9 Padas of Mesh. In assessing the net effects the nature of the Grah, 
occupying the Rasi, should also be taken into account. 


8-10. In the Dasha of Makar Navans in Vrishabh there will be tendency to perform 
undesirable deeds along with more adverse effects. In the Kumbh Navans there will be 
profits in business, in the Meen success in all ventures, in the Dasha of Vrischik Navans 
danger from fire, in the Dasha of Tula Navans recognition from Government and 
reverence from all, in the Dasha of Kanya Navans danger from enemies, in the Dasha of 
Kark Navans distress to wife, in the Dasha of Simh Navans diseases of eyes and in the 
Dasha of Mithun Navans obstacles in earning livelihood. Such will be the effects of the 
9 NavansSas of Vrishabh. Similar interpretation should be made of further verses on this 
subject. 


11-12. In Mithun in the Dasha of the Vrishabh Ans there will be acquisition of wealth, in 
the Dasha of Mesh Ans attacks of fever, in the Dasha of Meen Ans affectionate relations 


with maternal uncle, in the Dasha of Kumbh Ans increase in the number of enemies, in 
the Dasha of Makar Ans danger from thieves, in the Dasha of Dhanu Ans increase in the 
stock of weapons, in the Dasha of Vrishabh Ans injury by some weapon and in the 
Dasha of Mithun Ans enjoyment. 


13-15. In Kark in the Dasha of Kark Ans there will be distress, ... Simh displeasure of 
the sovereign, ... Kanya reverence from kinsmen, ... Tula beneficence, ... Vrischik 
creation of obstacles by father, ... Dhanu increase of learning and wealth, ... Makar 
danger from water, ... Kumbh increase in the production of agricultural products and in 
the Dasha of the Meen Ans acquisition of more wealth and enjoyment. 


16-17. In Simh in the Dasha of the Navans of Vrischik there will be distress and 
disputes, ... Tula extraordinary gains, ... Kanya gains of wealth, ... Kark danger from 
wild animals, ... Simh birth of a son, ... Mithun increase of enemies, ... Vrishabh gains 
from sale of cattle, ... Mesh danger from animals and in the Dasha of Meen Ans 
journeys to distant places. 


18-19. In Kanya in the Dasha of Kumbh Ans there will be acquisition of wealth, ... 
Makar financial gains, ... Dhanu mingling with kinsmen, ... Mesh happiness from 
mother, ... Vrishabh birth of children, ... Mithun increase in enemies, ... Kark love with 
some woman, ... Simh aggravation of diseases and in the Dasha of Kanya Ans birth of 
children. 


20-22. In Tula in the Dasha of Tula Ans there will be financial gains, ... Vrischik good 
relations with kinsmen, ... Dhanu happiness from father, ... Makar disputes with 
mother, ... Kumbh birth of a son and financial gains, ... Meen entanglement with 
enemies, ... Vrischik disputes with women, ... Tula danger from water and in Dasha of 
Kanya Ans more financial gains. 


23-24’. In Vrischik in the Dasha of Kark Ans there will be financial gains, ... Simh 
opposition to the king, ... Mithun acquisition of land, ... Vrishabh financial gains, ... 
Mesh danger from reptiles, ... Meen danger from water, ... Kumbh profits in business, 
... Makar profits in business, ... Makar possibility of suffering from diseases and in the 
Dasha of Dhanu Ans financial gains. 


25-27. In Dhanu in the Dasha of Mesh Ans there will be financial gains, ... Vrishabh 
acquisition of more land, ... Mithun success in ventures, ... Kark success all round, ... 
Simh increase in the accumulated wealth, ... Kanya disputes, ... Tula financial gains, ... 
Vrischik affliction with diseases, ... Dhanu happiness from children. 


28-29. In Makar in the Dasha of Makar Ans there will be happiness from children, ... 
Kumbh gain of agricultural products, ... Meen well being, ... Vrischik danger from 


poison, ... Tula financial gains, ... Kanya increase in enemies, ... Kark acquisition of 
property, ... Simh danger from wild animals and in the Dasha of Mithun Ans danger of 
falling from a tree. 


30-32. In Kumbh in the Dasha of Vrishabh Ans there will be financial gains, ... Mesh 
diseases of the eyes, ... Meen journeys to distant places, ... Kumbh increase in wealth, 
... Makar success in all kinds of ventures, ... Dhanu more enemies, ... Mesh loss of 
happiness and enjoyment, ... Vrishabh death, ... Mithun well being. 


33-341. In the Meen in the Dasha of Kark Ans there will be increase in wealth, ... Simh 
recognition by Government, ... Kanya financial gains, ... Tula gains from all sources, ... 
Vrischik fever, ... Dhanu more enemies, ... Makar conjugal disputes, ... Kumbh danger 
from water and in the Dasha of Meen Ans good fortune all-round. In this manner on the 
Kaal Chakr, prepared on the basis of Pad of the Janm Nakshatr, the Dashas of the 
Navans Rasis and their duration can be assessed and prediction can be made for the 
whole life of the native. Appropriate remedial measures (recitation of Mantras, oblations 
etc.) should be taken to alleviate the adverse effects, caused by malefic Dashas. 


35-37. The effects of Dasha in Raj Yog etc. have already been described in Vol. I of this 
book. The same should be applied in a judicious manner in the Kaal Chakr. These are in 
brief effects of Kaal Chakr Dasha. 


Ch. 50. Effects of the Char etc. Dashas 


1-3. Maharishi Parashar said. O Brahmin! I have already described the Char etc. Dashas. 
Now I am going to tell you the effects of these Dashas. The effects of the Dashas of the 
Rasis should be judged from the strength of the Lords of Rasis and whether they are 
benefics, or malefics. If the Lord of a Rasi possesses full strength, the effects of the 
Dasha of the Rasi will be realized in full. The effects of the Dasha will be of medium 
nature, if the strength is medium. If the Lord of R&si possesses little strength, the effects 
will be experienced accordingly. 


4-10. If there are malefics in the 8th, the Sth and the 9th from a Dasha R&si, the effects 
of the Dasha of that Rasi will be distressful. If there are malefics in the 3rd and the 6th 
from a Dasha Rasi, the effects of the Dasha will be victory over enemies and happiness. 
If there are benefics in the 3rd and the 6th from the Dasha R4si, there will be defeat in its 
Dasha. If there are benefics, or malefics in the 11th from the Dasha Ra4si, there will be 
conquests and happiness in the Dasha. If the Dasha Rasi is occupied by, or is owned by a 
benefic, the effects of its Dasha will be beneficial. If a Dasha Rasi, owned by a benefic, 
is occupied by a malefic, favourable effects will be experienced in the first part of the 
Dasha and they will be adverse in the latter part. If a Dasha Rasi, owned by a malefic is 
occupied by a benefic, the effects of the Dasha will be the same. A Dasha Rasi, owned 


and occupied by a malefic will always yield unfavourable results. The reverse will be the 
case in the case of the Dasha R4si, owned and occupied by a benefic. If a Dasha Rasi, 
owned by a benefic, is occupied by both benefic and 


malefic Grahas, the effects of Dasha will be adverse in its first part and favourable in the 
latter part. 


11-17. The assessment of the effects of the Dasha of the Dasha Rasi should be made 
after taking into account the disposition of the Grahas in the Rasi at birth and the 
disposition of Grahas during the Dasha. If the Dasha R&si is well disposed both at the 
time of birth and during its Dasha, the beneficial results will be realized in full. If it is 
ill-disposed during the Dasha, the effects will be of mixed nature. If the Dasha RAsi is 
ill-disposed both at the time of birth and during its Dasha, only evil effects will be 
experienced. 


18-19. The effects of the Dasha will be favourable, if it is occupied by a benefic and 
there is also a benefic in the Rasi previous to it. If the Rasi is occupied by a malefic, the 
effects will be of adverse nature. If there are benefics in Putr and Dharm, the effects of 
its Dasha will be favourable. The reverse will be the case, if Putr and Dharm are 
occupied by malefics. 


20-21. Kumbh, Vrishabh, Simh and Vrischik are Badhak Bhavas for the four Movable 
Rasis: Mesh, Kark, Tula and Makar. In other words the 11th Rasi to a Movable R4si is 
its Badhak Bhava. If there is a malefic in the Bhava, occupied by its Lord, or in Badhak 
Bhava of that Rasi, there will be occasions of great sorrow, imprisonment and diseases 
during the Dasha. 


22. The Dasha of a Rasi will be favourable, if it is occupied by its own Lord, or an 
exalted Grah. The Dasha of a R&asi, not occupied by any Grah, will be adverse. 


23-25. There will be great danger, imprisonment during a journey, displeasure of 
Government and danger from enemies in the Dasha and Antar Dasha of the Rasi, from 
which its Badhak Bhava, Vyaya, Ari and Randhr are occupied by Rahu. There will be 
loss, due to the displeasure of the king and danger therefrom in the Antar Dasha of the 
Rasi, that is occupied by Stirya, Mangal, Rahu and Sani. There will be the possibility of 
death, if the Sth and the 9th from the Antar Dasha R&si are occupied by a debilitated, or 
malefic Grah. 


26-28. There will be enjoyment, acquisition of chiefship of a town, or village, birth of a 
son, financial gains, well-being, dawn of fortune, attainment of the position of a 
Commander of an Army and progress all-round, if there is an exalted Grah in the Trikon 
from the Antar Dasha R&si. There will be in his Dasha financial gains, well-being and 


birth of a son, if the Grah, who is the Lord of the Dasha, happens to be in a benefic Rasi 
and receives a Drishti from Guru. 


29-32. Vrishabh, Tula, Makar, Kumbh and Mithun are the inimical Rasis of Strya. The 
inimical Rasis of Candr and other Grahas may be reckoned similarly. If a Grah is in an 
inimical Rasi, his Dasha will be full of adversities. The effects of the Dasha of Rasis and 
Grahas should be judged after taking into account the above rules. 


33-34. The Dashas of that Grah will be favourable, who is Raj Yog Karak, who is 
disposed between two benefics (that is there are benefics in the 2nd and the 12th Bhavas 
to that Grah) and who has benefics in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Bhavas from him. A malefic 
Grah becomes favourable, if he is disposed between benefics. 


35-36. The whole of the Dasha of a Grah, who is related to a friendly and benefic Grah 
at the commencement and the end of the Dasha, will be favourable. In an unfavourable 
Dasha the Antar Dasha of a benefic (Grah, or Rasi) becomes favourable. The Dasha of a 
Grah, or Rasi, 


who has benefics in the 5th, or the 9th from it, is also favourable. In this manner the 
effects of the Dasha should be judged, after taking into account the dispositions of the 
Grah, or Rasi at the commencement and at the end of the Dasha. 


37-39. The Dasha of the Grahas and Rasis, who have benefics in the Trikon from them is 
favourable. If the Dasha of a benefic Rasi commences in a benefic RAsi, it will be very 
favourable. If an evil Dasha commences in a benefic RAsi, it is also favourable. 
Therefore the commencement of a Dasha should always be kept in view in assessing the 
results of the Dasha. There will be loss of fortune, if at the commencement of the Dasha 
there is a malefic Rasi, or, if the Lord of the Dasha RAsi is in debilitation. 


40-41. There will be loss of fortune, wealth and agricultural products and infliction with 
disease during the Dasha of the Rasi, occupied by a debilitated Grah, or, if there is a 
debilitated Grah in the 5th from it, or in the 9th from it, or whose Lord is debilitated, or 
related to a debilitated Grah. 


42. Four Rasis from Kumbh and four Rasis from Vrischik belong to Rahu and Ketu, 
respectively. If Rahu and Ketu are in any one of the aforesaid Rasis, the Dasha will be 
productive of beneficial results. 


43-45. Ifa Grah, whose Dasha is otherwise considered favourable, is placed in a Marak 
Bhava, or, if the Rasi, in which his Dasha comes to an end, receives a Drishti from Sukr, 
or Candr, there will be in his Dasha displeasure of government and loss of wealth. 


46-47. There will be loss of everything, imprisonment, death, exile from the country and 
great distress at the end of the Dasha of Rahu. The above effects will definitely be 
realized, if there are malefics in the 5th and the 9th from Rahu. Beneficial and adverse 
effects should be predicted in this manner. 


48-50. The same would be the effects in the Dasha of the R&si, occupied by malefics, 
like Rahu etc. The association of a Marak Grah with the R4si at the time of 
commencement of its Dasha is not productive of good effects. If such a Grah is Rahu, 
there will be imprisonment, or loss of wealth. 


51-52. The natural characteristics of the Bhava, occupied by Rahu, are harmed at the 
commencement of the Dasha. If such a Bhava is Dhan, there will be loss of wealth. If 
Candr and Sukr are in Vyaya, there will be losses, due to the displeasure of government. 
If Mangal and Ketu are so disposed, there will be death, or danger from fire. There will 
be acquisition of a kingdom, if Sukr and Candr are in Dhan at the commencement of the 
Dasha. This means, that the effects of the Bhava, in which Candr and Sukr are placed at 
the commencement and end of a Dasha, are strengthened. Thus their disposition in Ari, 
Randhr and Vyaya will produce only adverse effects. 


53-55. Similarly the sages have described the effects of the Bhava with Argal. If there is 
an auspicious Argal causing benefic, or malefic Grah of a Rasi and Lagn receives a 
Drishti from him, that Rasi will prevail. Here Lagn is the secondary condition. If the 
Grah, causing uninterrupted Argal, gives a Drishti to a Rasi, that Rasi will prevail. In 
other words good effects will be derived in the Dasha of that Rasi. The Dasha of the 
Rasi, which does not receive a Drishti from an auspicious Argal, or the Dasha of a Rasi 
with Vipreet Argal will not 


be favourable. The Dasha of that Rasi, which receives a Drishti from a benefic, will be 
favourable. 


56-59. Financial gains will be derived in the Dasha of the Rasi, which is occupied by its 
benefic Lord, or by an exalted Grah, who receives a Drishti from him. There will be loss 
of wealth, if such a Grah is in the 12th Bhava to the Rasi (or Bhava). There will be 
destruction of all good effects, distress to children and father and mental agony in the 
Dasha of the Rasi, if there are malefics in the Sth and the 9th from the Rasi. Evil effects 
will be experienced in the Dasha of the Rasi, which is occupied by Randhr’s Lord, 
Vyaya’s Lord, Siirya, Mangal, or Sani. 


60-63. The Dasha of the Rasi will cause distress to children, exile to a foreign country 
and continuous disturbances in life, if Rahu and Ketu are in the Trikon to the Rasi. There 
will be danger from enemies, from the king and disease in the Dasha of the Rasi, which 
is so posited, that the 6th and the 8th from it are occupied by malefic, debilitated, or 


combust Grahas. There will be destruction of house, land and agricultural fields, if there 
is a malefic, or debilitated Grah in the 4th from the Rasi. There will be loss of house, 
due to negligence, if such a Grah is Mangal. There will be heart pain and danger from 
government, if the Grah is Sani and there will be losses all round and danger from 
poison and thieves, if the Grah is Rahu. 


64-66'%. There will be pilgrimage to holy places in the Dasha of the Rasi, who has Rahu 
in the 10th to it. There will be gain of earnings, religious rites, gain of wealth, renown 
for good deeds and success in efforts and ventures in the Dasha of the Rasi, which is so 
posited, that the 10th, the 11th and the 9th from it are occupied by benefics. There will 
be birth of children, happiness from wife and recognition by the Government in the 
Dasha of the Rasi, from which the Sth, the 7th and the 9th are occupied by benefic, or 
exalted Grahas. During the Dasha of the Bhavas (R&sSis), occupied by Putr’s, Labh’s, 
Karm’s, Bandhu’s, Dharm’s and Lagn’s Lord, there will be growth of these Bhavas. The 
good effects will be in proportion to the strength of the Bhavas and the Grahas, 
occupying them. 


67-70. In the Dasha of a Rasi (Bhava) there will be well-being, increase in opulence and 
glory and devotion to deities and Brahmins, if it is occupied by Guru, Sukr, or the Lord 
of a Trikon. There will be acquisition of more conveyances and cattle etc. in the Dasha 
of the Rasi (Bhava), which is so posited, that the 4th from it is occupied by an exalted 
Grah, or Lord of a Trikon. Candr there will give things, like grains, Ghi etc. Full Candr 
will favour with a treasure and jewels etc. Sukr there, will provide enjoyment from 
music etc. 


71-72. There will be enjoyment of the palanquin-like conveyance in the Dasha of the 
Rasi (Bhava), from which the 4th is occupied by Guru. There will be success in all 
ventures, great opulence and glory, acquisition of a kingdom during the Dasha of a Rasi 
(Bhava), which has the Yog of the Lord of Lagn, Dharm’s Lord, Karm’s Lord, an exalted 
Grah, or benefics. The effects of the Dashas of various Bhavas should be judged in this 
manner. 


73-77. The effects of the Dashas of each Rasi, or Grah (Nakshatr Dasha) depend on their 
18 different kinds of conditions. They are deep exaltation, exaltation, dispositions on 
their either side, Multrikon, own, Adhimitr, Tatkalik Mitra’s, neutral, enemy’s, 
Adhisatru’s Rasi, deep debilitation, debilitated, or enemy’s Varg, own Varg, disposition 
in a Kendr, disposition in a Trikon, defeated in war between Grahas, deep combustion. 


78-83'4. Acquisition of kingdom, enjoyment and acquisition of more property are the 
effects of the whole Dasha of the Grah, who is in deep exaltation and is fully equipped 
with all the six kinds of strength, great opulence and glory with some possibility of 
affliction with disease are the effects of the Grah, placed in his Rasi of exaltation. The 


Dasha of a Grah in deep debilitation is called Rikt. Diseases, loss of wealth and danger 
of death are the effects of the Dasha of such a Grah. The Dasha of the Grah, who is ina 
condition in between deep exaltation and deep debilitation is known, as Avrohini 
(descending). The Dasha of the Grah in exaltation, or in a friend’s Rasi is called Madhya 
(of middle order). This Dasha also yields moderately good effects. The Dasha of a Grah, 
placed in a condition in between deep debilitation and deep exaltation, is called Rohini 
(ascending). The Dasha of a Grah, placed in between the debilitated and enemy Navans 
is called Adham (evil). Dangers of various kinds, distress and sorrows are the results of 
the Dasha of such a Grah. These Dashas give results, according to their nomenclature. 


84-87. The Dashas of other Grahas become auspicious and augment the fortune, if the 
Lord of Dharm and Guru are in any way related with Yog, Kendr, or the Bhava 
concerned etc. The Grah with Yog of good fortune at birth produces good effects, when 
he is free from retrogression and becomes direct. The weakness, inabilities and Yogas of 
other Grahas should also be taken into account in judging their effects. All those Dashas 
give full, medium and little effects in accordance with the disposition of the Grahas in 
the Kendr, Panaphara and Apoklima. 


88-8914. The Grahas in Shirshodaya, Ubhayodaya and Prishthodaya Rasis, yield their 
results, respectively, at the commencement, in the middle and at the end of the Dasha. 
All the Grahas yield auspicious results in the Antar Dasha of Naisargik (natural, 
constant) and Tatkalik (according to position) friends. The results will be adverse in the 
Antar Dasha of inimical Grahas. 


Antar Dashas of Rasis 


90-96. There are Antar Dashas of the 12 Rasis, commencing from the Rasi, in which the 
Lord of the Dasha is placed. There will be auspicious results, like acquisition of 
kingdom in the Antar Dasha of a Rasi, which is occupied by its own Lord, or a friendly 
Grah. There will be inauspicious results, like loss of wealth, disputes, danger from 
diseases etc. in the Antar Dasha of the Rasi, which may be Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, or is 
occupied by a malefic, debilitated Grah, or a Grah, placed in an inimical Rasi. The Rasi, 
which contained more auspicious marks in the Ashtak Varg will yield benefic effects in 
its Antar Dasha. Adverse will be the effects of the Antar Dasha of the Rasi, which 
contains more inauspicious marks. For assessing the results the Rasi, from which the 
Dasha commences, should be treated, as Lagn and the Bhavas thereafter should be 
assumed to have the characteristics, as if they are so from Lagn. Thus the 2nd Bhava 
from that Rasi will be the Bhava of the wealth, the 3rd of co-borns and so on. There will 
be gains, or losses of Dhatus etc., assigned to the Rasis and the Grahas, in the Antar 
Dasha of the Rasis concerned. In judging the effects of the Antar Dashas of the Grahas 
their benefic and malefic nature, relations with the malefic, or benefic, Drishtis on them 
and their disposition in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya etc. should all be kept in view. 


97. The results of the Antar Dasha’s Pratyantar Dashas of the Rasis should be assessed in 
the manner, explained in this chapter. 


Ch. 51. Working out of Antar Dashas of Grahas and RAsis in Vimshottari etc. Dasha 
systems 


1. For finding out the span of the Antar Dasha of a Grah in the Dasha of the same, or 
another Grah multiply the Dasha years of the former with the Dasha years of the latter 
and divide the product by the total Dasha years of all the Grahas. For finding out the 
span of the Pratyantar Dasha of the same, or any other Grah in the Antar Dasha of 
another Grah multiply the years etc. of the Antar Dasha with the Dasha years of the 
other Grah and divide the product by the total Dasha years of all the Grahas. The figure 
so available in months etc. will represent the Pratyantar Dasha of the former. 


2. In every Dasha the first Antar Dasha belongs to the Lord of the Dasha. Then the 
further Antar Dashas belong to the other 8 Grahas in the same order, as followed for the 
Dashas. The same applies to Pratyantar Dasha. 


The Antar Dashas of Char Grahas in Char etc. Dasha 


3-4. The Antar Dashas of the Charadi Kendradi Dasha of the Grahas are worked out by 
dividing the Dasha years by 9. The first Dasha will invariably be of the Lord of the 
Dasha. Thereafter there will be Antar Dashas of Grahas, placed in Kendras, Panapharas 
and Apoklimas, respectively, according to their strength. 


Antar Dashas of Rasis 


5. The Antar Dashas of Rasis is worked out by dividing the Dasha years by 12. 
Pratyantar Dashas of the Antar Dashas are also calculated in the same manner. 


6. The Antar Dashas will start from the Dasha R4si, or from the Rasi 7th therefrom, 
whichever is stronger. The Antar Dashas are in the onwards order, if the Dasha R&si is 
odd and in the reverse order, if it is even. 


7-12. O Brahmin! Now I will acquaint you with the special characteristics of the order of 
the Antar Dashas of the Rasis. If the Dasha Rasi is a Movable one, the Antar Dashas of 
the 12 Rasis are in the onwards, or reverse order. If the Dasha Asraya R&si is a Fixed 
one, the Antar Dashas will start from it and thereafter there will be an Antar Dasha of 
every sixth Rasi. If the Dasha Ashraya R&si is a Dual one, the first Antar Dasha will 
belong to it. Thereafter there will be Antar Dashas of Rasis in Kendr to it, Rasis in 

Kendr to the Sth from it and Rasis in Kendr to the 9th from it. In the case of all kinds of 


Rasis, namely Movable, Fixed, or Dual, the order will be onwards, if the Dasha Asraya 
Rasi is an odd one and in the reverse order, if it is an even one. The so called Dasha 
Asraya Rasi is known, as Pak RAsi. In the first order Rasi, which is Pak RAsi, is also 
called Bhog Rasi. Later, if the Dasha Prad RAsi is even, then the Bhog Rasi will be that, 
which is at the same RAasi distance, as the Dasha Asraya R&si is from the Dasha Prad 
Rasi. For the Char, Sthir and Trikon Dasha, the Pak and Bhog should be determined in 
this manner. If Pak and Bhog RA&sis are associated with malefics, there will be pain in the 
body and mental agony. There will be enjoyment, if they are associated with benefics. In 
the Kaal Chakr Dasha, like the Vimshottari Dasha system, the span of Dasha should be 
multiplied by the span of the Dasha of the Rasi, whose Antar Dasha is required and the 
product should be divided by the total Dasha years of (all) the Rasi(s). The years, 
months etc. as arrived at will represent the Antar Dasha of the Rasi concerned. 


13-16. Now I will tell you the method of working out the Antar Dashas in the Pinda, Ans 
and Nisarg Dashas. The Lord of Dasha is Dasha Pachak of full part, the Grah, associated 
with, is Pachak of part, the Grah in Trikon from him is Pachak of 1/3 part and the Grah 
in the 4th and 8th from him are Pachak of 4 part, the Grah in the 7th from him is Pachak 
of 1/7 part of the Dasha. No Grah in any other Bhava is Antar Dash Pachak. In this 
manner there are Antar Dasha Pachakas in the above-mentioned Bhavas from the 
various Bhavas, including Lagn. In any of such Bhavas, if there are more than one Grah, 
then the one, who is the strongest amongst them will be the Pachak. Take the fractions 
and reduce them in equivalent fractions with a common denominator. Add up the aliquot 
parts of the Dasha, representative of the various numerators, leaving out the 
denominators. The Antar Dashas will be arrived at, when the various aliquots are 
converted into years, months etc. within the main Dasha and divided by the above sum. 
(The calculations, given above, are not the literal translation of the text in the verses 
concerned, but their actual meaning and sense. This has been got confirmed by checking 
up with similar information, given in Kalyana Varma’s Saravali and Varamihir’s Brihat 
Jatak) 


Ch. 52. Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Surya (Vimshottari) 


1-3. Good effects, like acquisition of wealth and grains etc., are derived in the Antar 
Dasha of Siirya in his own Dasha, if Strya is exalted, in his own Bhava, in Labh, in a 
Kendr, or in a Trikon. Adverse results will be experienced, if Siirya is debilitated, or in 
an inauspicious Bhava, or Rasi. Medium effects will be realized, if Stirya is in other 
houses. If Stirya is the Lord of Dhan, or Yuvati, there will be danger of premature death, 
or death-like sufferings. The remedial measures to be adopted are Mrityunjaya Japa, or 
the worship of Surya (by recitation of appropriate Mantras, charity etc.). 


4-6. Functions, like marriage etc., gain of wealth and property, acquisition of a house, of 
land, cattle and conveyances etc. will be the effects of the Antar Dasha of Candr in the 


Dasha of Surya, if Candr is in a Kendr, or in a Trikon. There will be marriage of the 
native, birth of children, beneficence of and favours from kings and fulfillment of all 
ambitions, if Candr is in his exaltation Rasi, or in his own Rasi. 


7-10. Distress to wife and children, failures in ventures, disputes with others, loss of 
servants, antagonism with the king and destructions of wealth and grains will be the 
effects, if Candr is waning, or is associated with malefics. Effects, like danger from 
water, mental agony, imprisonment, danger from diseases, loss of position, journeys to 
difficult places, disputes with coparceners, bad food, trouble from thieves etc., 
displeasure of the king, urinary troubles, pains in the body will be experienced, if Candr 
is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya. 


11-12'4. Luxuries, comforts, pleasures, dawn of fortune (Bhagyodaya), increase in the 
enjoyment from wife and children, acquisition of kingdom, performance of marriage and 
religious functions, gain of garments, land and conveyance and birth of children and 
grandchildren will be the auspicious effects, if there are benefics in the Ist, the 9th, or a 
Kendr from the Lord of the Dasha. 


13-14. Unpalatable food, or course food, exile to outside places etc. will be the effects in 
the Antar Dasha, if Candr is in the 6th, the 8th, or the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, 
or, if Candr is weak. There will be premature death, if Candr is the Lord of a Marak 
Bhava. To acquire 


peace and comfort, the remedial measure is giving in charity of a white cow and a 
female buffalo (Mahishi). 


15-18. Auspicious effects, like acquisition of land, gain of wealth and grains, acquisition 
of a house etc. will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Mangal in the Dasha of Strya, if 
Mangal is in his exaltation Rasi, in his own R&si, in a Kendr, or in a Trikon. All-round 
gains, attainment of the position of a Commander of the Army, destruction of enemies, 
peace of mind, family comforts and increase in the number of co-borns will be the 
effects, if Mangal is yuti with the Lagn’s Lord. 


19-20. Brutality, mental ailment, imprisonment, loss of kinsmen, disputes with brothers 
and failure in ventures will result, if Mangal is in the 8th, or in the 12th from the Lord of 
the Dasha, if Mangal is associated with malefics, or, if Mangal is without dignity and 
strength. 


21-22. Destruction of wealth by the displeasure of the king will be the effect, if Mangal 
is in his debilitation Rasi, or be weak. Diseases of the mind and body will result, if 
Mangal is the Lord of Dhan, or Yuvati Bhava. Recovery from ill health, increase in 
longevity and success in adventures are possible, if remedial measure, like recitation of 


Vedas, Japa and Vrashotsarg are performed in the prescribed manner. 


23-26'/. In the Antar Dasha of Rahu in the Dasha of Surya, if Rahu is in a Kendr, or ina 
Trikon from Lagn, there will be in the first two months loss of wealth, danger from 
thieves, snakes, infliction of wounds and distress to wife and children. After 2 months 
inauspicious effects will disappear and enjoyment and comforts, sound health, 
satisfaction, favours from the king and government etc. will be the favourable effects, if 
Rahu is yuti with benefics, or, if Rahu is in the Navans of a benefic. Recognition from 
the king, good fortune, name and fame, some distress to wife and children, birth of a 

son, happiness in the family etc. will be derived, if Rahu is in an Upachaya from Lagn, if 
Rahu is associated with a Yog Karak, or is placed auspiciously from the Lord of the 
Dasha. 


27-29. Imprisonment, loss of position, danger from thieves and snakes, inflection of 
wounds, happiness to wife and children, destruction of cattle, house and agricultural 
fields, diseases, consumption (Gulma - enlargement of the skin), dysentery etc. will be 
the results, if Rahu is weak, or is in the 8th, or in the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


30-31. Adverse effects, like premature death and danger from snakes will be derived, if 
Rahu is in Dhan, or Yuvati, or, if Rahu is associated with the Lords of either of these 
Bhavas. Worship of Goddess Durga, Japa, giving in charity of a black cow, or female 
buffalo are the remedial measures for alleviation of the above evil effects, or total escape 
from them. 


32-33'4. Marriage of the native, favours by the king, gain of wealth and grains, birth of a 
son, fulfillment of the ambitions by the beneficence of the sovereign and gain of clothes 

will be the auspicious effects, derived in the Antar Dasha of Guru in the Dasha of Strya, 
if Guru is in a Kendr, or in a Trikon to Lagn, in his exaltation Rasi, in his own RAsi, or in 
his own Varg. 


34-36. Acquisition of a kingdom, comforts of conveyance, like palanquin (motor car in 
the present times), gain of position etc. will result, if Guru is the Lord of Dharm, or 
Karm. Better fortune, charities, religious inclinations, worship of deities, devotion to 
preceptor, fulfillment of ambitions will be the auspicious effects, if Guru is well placed 
with reference to the Lord of the Dasha. 


37-39. Distress to wife and children, pains in the body, displeasure of the king, non- 
achievement of desired goals, loss of wealth, due to sinful deeds, mental worries etc. 
will result in his Antar Dasha, if Guru is in the 6th, or in the 8th from the Lord of the 
Dasha, or is associated with malefics. Giving in charity gold, a tawny-coloured cow 
(Kapila Gaya), worship of Isht Lord (Isht Dev) are the remedial measures to obtain 
alleviation of the evil effects and to achieve good health and happiness. 


40-42. Destruction of foes, full enjoyment, some gain of grains, auspicious functions, 
like marriage etc. at home will be the good effects, derived in the Antar Dasha of Sani in 
the Dasha of Siirya, if Sani is in a Kendr, or in a Trikon from Lagn. Well-being, 
acquisition of more property, recognition by the king, achievement of renown in the 
country, gain of wealth from many sources will be the effects, if Sani is in his exaltation, 
in his own, in a friendly Rasi and, if Sani is yuti with a friendly Grah. 


43-44, Rheumatism, pains, fever, dysentery-like disease, imprisonment, loss in ventures, 
loss of wealth, quarrels, disputes with coparceners, claimants etc. will be the effects in 
the Antar Dasha, if Sani is in the 8th, or the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, or is 
associated with malefics. 


45-47. There will be loss of friends at the commencement, good effects during the 
middle part and distress at the end of the Dasha. In addition to other evil effects there 
will be separation from parents and wandering, if Sani be in his Rasi of debilitation. If 
Sani is the Lord of Dhan, or Yuvati, there will be danger of premature death. Giving in 
charity black cow, buffalo, goat and Mrityunjaya Japa, are the remedial measures for 
obtaining relief from the evil effects of the Antar Dasha. These measures help to achieve 
happiness and gain of wealth and property. 


48-49'4. Acquisition of a kingdom, enthusiasm and vivacity, happiness from wife and 
children, acquisition of conveyance through the beneficence of the sovereign, gain of 
clothes, ornaments, pilgrimage to holy places, acquisition of a cow etc. will be the good 
effects in the Antar Dasha of Budh in the Dasha of Surya, if Budh is in a Kendr, or ina 
Trikon from Lagn. 


50-51’. Budh becomes very beneficial, if he gets associated with the Lord of Dharm. 
Reverence from and popularity amongst people, performance of pious deeds and 
religious rites, devotion to the preceptor and deities, increase in wealth and grains and 
birth of a son, will be the auspicious effects, if Budh is in Dharm, Putr, or Karm. 


52-53'4. Marriage, offering of oblations, charity, performance of religious rites, name 
and fame, becoming famous by assuming another name, good food, becoming happy, 
like Indra, by acquiring wealth, robes and ornaments will be the effects, if Budh is in an 
auspicious Bhava, like a Trikon etc. from the Lord of the Dasha. 


54-57. Body distress, disturbance of peace of mind, distress to wife and children, will be 
the evil effects in the Antar Dasha of Budh, if he is in the 6th, the 8th, or the 12th from 
the Lord of the Dasha (Budh cannot be in the 6th, or the 8th from Surya). There will be 
evil effects at the commencement of the Antar Dasha, some good effects in the middle 
part of the Antar Dasha and the possibility of displeasure of the king and exile to a 


foreign country at the end of the Dasha. If Budh is the Lord of Dhan, or Yuvati, there 
will be pains in the body and attacks of fever. For relief from the evil effects and to 
regain good health and happiness the remedial measures are the recitation of Vishnu 
Sahasranam and giving in charity grains and an idol, made of silver. 


58-59. Body pains, mental agony, loss of wealth, danger from the king, quarrels with the 
kinsmen will be the effects of the Antar Dasha of Ketu in the Dasha of Surya. If Ketu is 
associated with the Lord of Lagn, there will be some happiness at the commencement, 
distress in the middle part and receipt of the news of death at the end of the Antar Dasha. 


60-61. Diseases of teethe, or cheeks, urinary troubles, loss of position, loss of friends 
and wealth, death of father, foreign journey and troubles from enemies will be the 
results, if Ketu is in the 8th, or the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


62-64. Beneficial effects, like happiness from wife and children, satisfaction, increase of 
friends, gain of clothes etc. and renown will be derived, if Ketu is in Sahaj, Ari, Karm, 
or Labh. 


If Ketu is Lord of Dhan, or Yuvati (or is in any of those Bhavas), there will be danger of 
premature death. The remedial measures for obtaining relief from the evil effects are 
recitation of Mantras of Goddess Durga (Shat Chandi Path) and giving a goat in charity. 


65-68. Marriage and happiness, as desired from wife, gain of property, travels to other 
places, meeting with Brahmins and the king, acquisition of kingdom, riches, 
magnanimity and majesty, auspicious functions at the home, availability of sweet 
preparations, acquisition of pearls and other jewels, clothes, cattle, wealth, grains and 
conveyances, enthusiasm, good reputation etc. are the auspicious effects of the Antar 
Dasha of Sukr in the Dasha of Siirya, if Sukr is placed in a Kendr, or in a Trikon, or, if 
Sukr is in his exaltation Rasi, in his own Rasi, in his own Varg, or in a friendly Rasi. 


69-73. Displeasure of the king, mental agony and distress to wife and children will be 
the effects in the Antar Dasha of Sukr, if he is in the 6th, the 8th, or the 12th from the 
Lord of the Dasha. The effects of the Antar Dasha would be moderate at its 
commencement, good during the middle portion and evil effects, like disrepute, loss of 
position, inimical relations with kinsmen and loss of comforts, will be derived at the 
end. If Sukr is the Lord of Yuvati (and Dhan), there will be pains in the body and the 
possibility of suffering from diseases. There will be premature death, if Sukr is 
associated with Ari’s, or Randhr’s Lord. The remedial measures for obtaining relief from 
the evil effects are Mrityunjaya Japa, Rudra Japa and giving in charity a tawny cow, or 
female buffalo. 


Ch. 53. Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Candr 


1-2'4. Acquisition of horses, elephants and clothes, devotion to deities and preceptor, 
recitation of religious songs in praise of God, acquisition of a kingdom, extreme 
happiness and enjoyment and name and fame will be the beneficial results in the Antar 
Dasha of Candr in her own Dasha, if she is placed in her exaltation Rasi, her own RAsi, 
in a Kendr, or in a Trikon, or is associated with the Lord of Dharm, or Karm. 


3-6. Loss of wealth, loss of position, lethargy, agony, antagonism towards the king and 
ministers, distress to mother, imprisonment and loss of kinsmen will be the evil effects 
in her Antar Dasha, if Candr is in her debilitation Rasi, if Candr is associated with 
malefics, or, if Candr is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya. If Candr is the Lord of Dhan, or 
Yuvati, or is associated with Randhr’s, or with Vyaya’s Lord, there will be pains in the 
body and danger of premature death. The remedial measures are giving in charity of a 
tawny-coloured cow, or female buffalo. 


7-8'2. Advancement of fortune, recognition by the government, gain of clothes and 
ornaments, success in all efforts, increase in agricultural production and prosperity at 
home and profits in business will be the favourable effects of the Antar Dasha of Mangal 
in the Dasha of Candr, if Mangal is in a Kendr, or in a Trikon. Great happiness and 
enjoyment of comforts will be derived, if Mangal is in his exaltation Rasi, or in his own 
Rasi. 


9-12. Distress to the body, losses at home and in agricultural production, losses in 
business dealings, antagonism, or adverse relations with servants (employees) and the 
king, separation from kinsmen and hot temperament will be the evil effects in the Antar 
Dasha of Mangal, if he is placed in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya from Lagn, be associated with, 
or receives a Drishti from malefics in the 6th, the 8th, or the 12th from the Lord of the 
Dasha. 


13-14. There will be some auspicious results at the commencement of the Antar Dasha 
of Rahu in the Dasha of Candr, but later there will be danger from the king, thieves and 
snakes, distress to cattle, loss of kinsmen and friends, loss of reputation and mental 
agony, if Rahu is placed in a Kendr, or in a Trikon. 


15-16. Success in all ventures, gain of conveyances, garments etc. from the king etc. in 
the South-West direction will be derived, if Rahu in his Antar Dasha receives a Drishti 
from benefics, if Rahu is in Sahaj, Ari, Karm, or Labh, or, if Rahu is yuti with a Yog 
Karak Grah. 


17-18. Loss of position, mental agony, distress to wife and children, danger of diseases, 
danger from the king, scorpions and snakes etc. will happen, if Rahu is weak and is 
placed in the 8th, or the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


19-21. Pilgrimage to holy places, visits to sacred shrines, beneficence, inclination 
towards charitable deeds etc. will be the results, if Rahu is in a Kendr, in a Trikon, or in 
the 3rd, or the 11th from the Lord of the Dasha. There will be body troubles (physical 
afflictions), if Rahu is in Dhan, or in Yuvati. Rahu Japa and giving a goat in charity are 
the remedial measures for obtaining relief from the evil effects in the Antar Dasha of 
Rahu. 


22-24’. Acquisition of a kingdom, auspicious celebrations at home, gains of clothes and 
ornaments, recognition from the king beneficence of the Isht Lord (Isht Devata), gains 
of wealth, land, conveyances, success in all ventures by the beneficence of the king will 
be the beneficial effects in the Antar Dasha of Guru in the Dasha of Candr, if Guru is 
placed in a Kendr, or in a Trikon to Lagn, or, if Guru is in his own, or in his exaltation 
Rasi. 


25-28'/. Destruction of preceptor (and father etc.) and children, loss of position, mental 
agony, quarrels, destruction of a house, conveyances and agricultural land will be the 
evil effects in his Antar Dasha, if Guru is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, if Guru is combust, 
in his debilitation Rasi, or be associated with malefics. Gains of cattle, grains, clothes 
and happiness from brothers, acquisition of property, valour, patience, oblations, 
celebrations, like marriage etc., gain of a kingdom etc. will be the favourable effects, if 
Guru is in 3rd, or in the 11th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


29-31. Effects, like unpalatable food, journeys to places away from the homeland, will 
be derived, if Guru is weak and is placed in the 6th, the 8th, or the 12th from Candr. 
There will be good effects at the commencement of the Antar Dasha and distress at its 
end. There will be premature death, if Guru is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. Remedial 
measures for obtaining relief from the above evil effects are recitation of Shiva 
Sahasranam Japa and giving gold in charity. 


32-34. Effects, like birth of a son, friendship, gain of wealth and property, profits in 
business with the help of Sudras, increase in agricultural production, gains from son, 
riches and glory by the beneficence of the king, will be experienced in the Antar Dasha 
of Sani in the Dasha of Candr, if Sani is in a Kendr, or in a Trikon from Lagn, or, if Sani 
is in his own RAsi, in his own Navans, in his exaltation Rasi, if Sani receives a Drishti 
from, or is associated with benefics, or, if Sani is in Labh with strength. 


35-35'/. Effects, like visits to holy places, bathing in holy rivers etc., the creation of 
troubles by many people and distress from enemies, will be derived in the Antar Dasha 


of Sani, if Sani is in Ari, Randhr, Vyaya, or Dhan, or, if Sani is in his debilitation Rasi. 


36-38. Effects, like enjoyments and gains of wealth some times, while opposition, or 


quarrels with wife and children at other times, will be realized, if Sani is in a Kendr, or 
in a Trikon from the Lord of that Dasha, or is endowed with strength. If Sani is in Dhan, 
Yuvati, or Randhr, there will be physical distress. The remedial measures to be adopted 
for obtaining relief from the evil effects are Mrityunjaya Japa, giving in charity a black 
cow, or female buffalo. 


39-41. Effects, like acquisition of wealth, recognition by the king, gain of clothes etc., 
discussions on Shastras gain of knowledge from society with learned and holy people, 
enjoyments, birth of children, satisfaction, profits in business, acquisition of conveyance 
and ornaments etc. will be experienced in the Antar Dasha of Budh in the Dasha of 
Candr, if Budh is in a Kendr, or in a Trikon, if Budh is in his own Rasi, in his own 
Navans, or in his exaltation Rasi, endowed with strength. 


42-43'/. Effects, like marriage, oblations (Yagya), charities, performance of religious 
rites, close relations with the king, social contacts with men of learning, acquisition of 
pearls, corals, Mani (jewels), conveyances, clothes, ornaments, good health, affections, 
enjoyments, drinking of Soma Rasa and other tasty syrups etc. will be derived in the 
Antar Dasha of Budh, if he is in a Kendr, or in a Trikon, or in the 11th, or in the 2nd 
from the Lord of the Dasha. 


44-46. Pains in the body, loss in agricultural ventures, imprisonment, distress to wife and 
children will be the inauspicious effects, if Budh be in the 6th, the 8th, or the 12th from 
the Lord of the Dasha, or be in his debilitation Rasi. If Budh is the Lord of Dhan, or 
Yuvati, there will be fear of fever. The remedial measures to be adopted for obtaining 
relief from the evil effects are recitation of Vishnu Sahasranam and giving a goat in 
charity. 


47-48. Effects, like gain of wealth, enjoyment, happiness to wife and children, religious 
inclination etc., will arise in the Antar Dasha of Ketu in the Dasha of Candr, if Ketu is in 
a Kendr, in a Trikon, or Sahaj and is endowed with strength. There will be some loss of 
wealth at the commencement of the Antar Dasha. Later all will be well. 


49-49. Gain of wealth, cattle etc. will be the effects, if Ketu is in a Kendr, in the 9th, 
the Sth, or the 11th from the Lord of the Dasha and is equipped with strength. There will 
be loss of wealth at the end of the Antar Dasha. 


50-52. There will be obstacles in ventures, due to interference by enemies and quarrels, 
if Ketu be in the 8th, or the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, or receives a Drishti from, 
or is associated with malefics. If Ketu is in Dhan, or in Yuvati, there will be danger of 
affliction of 


the body with diseases. Mrityunjaya Japa will give relief in all the evil effects and will 


ensure gain of wealth and property with the beneficence of Lord Shiva. 


53-55. Effects, like acquisition of a kingdom, gaining of clothes, ornaments, cattle, 
conveyances etc., happiness to wife and children, construction of a new house, 
availability of sweet preparations every day, use of perfumes, affairs with beautiful 
women, sound health etc. will be experienced in the Antar Dasha of Sukr in the Dasha of 
Candr, if Sukr is in a Kendr, in a Trikon, in Labh, Bandhu, or Dharm, or in his exaltation 
Rasi, or in his own Rasi. 


56. Physical soundness, good reputation, acquisition of more land and houses, will 
result, if Sukr is yuti with the Lord of the Dasha. 


57-5772. There will be loss of landed property, children, wife and cattle and opposition 
from government, if Sukr is in his debilitation Rasi, combust, or receives a Drishti from, 
or is associated with malefics. 


58-60. If Sukr is in Dhan in his exaltation Rasi, or in his own Rai, or is there, associated 
with the Lord of Labh, there will be acquisition of an underground hidden treasure, gain 
of land, enjoyment, birth of a son etc. Advancement of good fortune, fulfillment of 
ambitions with the beneficence of the king, devotion to deities and Brahmins, gain of 
jewels, like pearls etc. will result, if Sukr is yuti with Dharm’s, or Labh’s Lord. 


61. Acquisition of more house property and agricultural land and gain of wealth and 
enjoyment will be the good effects, if Sukr is in a Kendr, or in a Trikon from the Lord of 
the Dasha. 


62. Deportation to foreign lands, sorrows, death and danger from thieves and snakes will 
be the results, if Sukr is in the 6th, the 8th, or the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


63-64. There will be danger of premature death, if Sukr be the Lord of the 2nd, or 7th. 
The remedial measures to be adopted for obtaining relief from the evil effects are Rudra 
Japa and giving in charity a white cow and silver. 


65-67. Recovery of a lost kingdom and wealth, happiness in the family, acquisition of 
villages and land with the kind assistance of one’s friends and the king, birth of a son, 
beneficence of Goddess Lakshmi, will be the beneficial results in the Antar Dasha of 
Surya in the Dasha of Candr, if Surya is in his exaltation Rasi, in his own RAasi, in a 
Kendr, or in Putr, or in Dharm, or in Labh, or in Dhan, or in Sahaj. At the end of the 
Antar Dasha there is the likelihood of attacks of fever and lethargy. 


68-70. Danger from the government, thieves and snakes, affliction with fever and 
troubles in foreign journey are the likely results, if Stirya is in the 8th, or 12th from the 


Lord of the Dasha. If Surya is the Lord of Dhan, or Yuvati, there will be sufferings from 
fever in his Antar Dasha. Worship of Lord Shiva is the remedial measure to obtain relief 
from the above evil effects. 


Ch. 54. Effects of Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Mangal 


1-2'4. Effects, like gains of wealth by the beneficence of the king, beneficence of 
Goddess Lakshmi, recovery of a lost kingdom and of wealth, birth of a son, will arise in 
the Antar 


Dasha of Mangal in his own Dasha, if he is in a Kendr, in Putr, in Dharm, in Labh, in 
Sahaj, or in Dhan, or be associated with the Lord of Lagn. 


3-4. Fulfillment of ambitions by the beneficence of the king and acquisition of a house, 
land, cow, buffalo etc. will be the effects, if Mangal is in his exaltation, in his own Rasi, 
or in his own Navans and is endowed with strength. 


5-5'4. Urinary troubles, wounds, danger from snakes and the king will be the results, if 
Mangal is in Randhr, or Vyaya, or is associated with, or receives a Drishti from malefics. 


6-8. There will be mental agony and body pains, if Mangal is the Lord of Dhan, or 
Yuvati. Lord Shiva will give relief by restoring health and providing gains of wealth and 
happiness, if the person concerned performs Rudr Japa and gives a red-coloured bull in 
charity. 


9-10’. Effects, like recognition from government, gain of house, land etc., happiness 
from son, extraordinary profits in business, bathing in holy rivers, like Ganges and 
foreign journeys, will be the auspicious effects in the Antar Dasha of Rahu in the Dasha 
of Mangal, if Rahu is in his Multrikon, in his exaltation Rasi, in a Kendr, in Labh, Putr, 
or Dharm and is associated with benefics. 


11-14. Danger from snakes, wounds, destruction of cattle, danger from animals, 
diseases, due to imbalance of bile and wind, imprisonment etc. will be the results, if 
Rahu is in Randhr, or Vyaya, or receives a Drishti from, or is associated with malefics. 
There will be loss of wealth, if Rahu is in Dhan and great danger of premature death, if 
he is in Yuvati. The remedial measure to be adopted to obtain relief from the above evil 
effects are Naga Puja, offering food to Brahmins and Mrityunjaya Japa. They will help 
in the prolongation of longevity. 


15-16. Effects, like good reputation and renown, honours by government, increase in 
wealth and grains, happiness at home, gain of property, happiness from wife and 
children etc. will be realized in the Antar Dasha of Guru in the Dasha of Mangal, if Guru 


is in Dharm, or Putr, in a Kendr, or in Labh, or in Dhan, or, if Guru is in his exalted, or 
own Navans. 


17-19'4. Acquisition of a house, land, well-being, gain of property, sound health, good 
reputation, gains of cattle, success in business, happiness to wife and children, reverence 
from government, gain of wealth etc. will be beneficial effects, if Guru is in a Kendr, in 
a Trikon, or in the 11th from the Lord of the Dasha, or, if Guru is associated with the 
Lord of Dharm, Karm, or Bandhu, or Lagn, or, if Guru is in a benefic Navans etc. 


20-22. Danger from thieves, snakes, wrath of the king, bilious diseases, oppression by 
goblins (Prot), loss of servants and co-borns, will be evil effects, if Guru is in Ari, 
Randhr, or in Vyaya, or, if Guru is in his debilitation Rasi, or, if Guru is associated with, 
or receives a Drishti from malefics, or, if Guru is otherwise weak. There will be 
suffering from fever, or danger of premature death, if Guru is the Lord of Dhan. The 
remedial measure to be adopted to combat the above evil effects is recitation of Shiva 
Sahasranam. 


23-25. Effects, like recognition from the king, increase in reputation, gain of wealth and 
grains, happiness from children and grandchildren, increase in the number of cows etc. 
will be experienced in the Antar Dasha of Sani in the Dasha of Mangal, if Sani is in a 
Kendr, in a Trikon, in his Multrikon, in his exalted, or his own Navané, or, if Sani is 
associated with the 


Lord of Lagn, or, if Sani is associated with benefics. Results will generally fructify on 
Saturdays in the month of Sani. 


26-267. Danger from Yavana kings (foreign dignitaries), loss of wealth, imprisonment, 
possibility of affliction with diseases, loss in agricultural production will result, if Sani is 
in his debilitation Rasi, or in an enemy Ra&si, or, if Sani is in Randhr, or in Vyaya. 


27-29'/. Effects, like great danger, loss of life, wrath of king, mental agony, danger from 
thieves and fire, punishment by the king, loss of co-borns, dissensions amongst members 
of the family, loss of cattle, fear of death, distress to wife and children, imprisonment 
etc. will be felt, if Sani is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord and is associated with malefics. 


30-32. There will be journeys to foreign lands, loss of reputation, violent actions, loss 
from sale of agricultural lands, loss of position, agony, defeat in battle, urinary troubles 
etc., if Sani is in a Kendr, in the 11th, or in the Sth from the Lord of the Dasha. 


33-35. Effects, like death, danger from the king and thieves, rheumatism, pains, danger 
from the enemy and members of the family, will be experienced, if Sani is in the 8th, or 
the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha and is associated with malefics. There will be relief 


from the evil effects by the beneficence of Lord Shiva, if Mrityunjaya is performed in 
the prescribed mannet. 


36-37'/%. Effects, like association with pious and holy persons, performance of Ajaya 
Japa, charities, observance of religious rites, gain of reputation, inclination towards 
diplomacy, availability of sweetish preparations, acquisition of conveyances, clothes and 
cattle etc., conferment of authority in the king’s retinue, success in agricultural projects 
etc., will be experienced in the Antar Dasha of Budh in the Dasha of Mangal, if Budh is 
in a Kendr, or in a Trikon from Lagn. 


38-39. Diseases of heart, imprisonment, loss of kinsmen, distress to wife and children, 
destruction of wealth and cattle etc. will result, if Budh is in his debilitation Rasi, if 
Budh is combust, or, if Budh is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya. 


40-40’. There will be journeys to foreign lands, increase in the number of enemies, 
affliction with many kind of ailments, antagonism with the king, quarrels with kinsmen 
etc., if Budh be associated with the Lord of the Dasha. 


41-43’. Fulfillment of all ambitions, gain of wealth and grains, recognition by the king, 
acquisition of a kingdom, gain of clothes and ornaments, attachment to many kind of 
musical instruments, attainment of the position of a Commander of an Army, discussions 
on Shastras and Puranas, gain of riches to wife and children and beneficence of Goddess 
Lakshmi will be the very auspicious results, if Budh is in a Kendr, or Trikon from the 
Lord of the Dasha, or, if Budh is in his exaltation Rasi. 


44-45'4. Effects, like defamation, sinful thinking, harsh speech, danger from thieves, fire 
and the king, quarrels without reason, fear of attacks by thieves and dacoits (armed 
robber bands) during travels, will be derived, if Budh 1s in the 6th, the 8th, or the 12th 
from Mangal, or is associated with malefics. 


46-47. There will be a possibility of critical illness in the Antar Dasha of Budh, if he is 
Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. Remedial measures to obtain relief from these evil effects are 
recitation of Vishnu Sahasranam and giving a horse in charity. 


48-49’. Beneficence of the king, gain of wealth, little gains of land at the 
commencement of the Dasha and substantial later, birth of a son, conferment of 
authority by government, gain of cattle etc. will be the results in the Antar Dasha of Ketu 
in the Dasha of Mangal, if Ketu is in a Kendr, in a Trikon, in Sahaj, or Labh, or, if Ketu 
is associated with, or receives a Drishti from benefics. 


50-51'%. Birth of a son, increase in reputation, beneficence of Goddess Lakshmi, gains 
of wealth from employees, attainment of the position of a Commander of an Army, 


friendship with the king, performance of oblations, gains of clothes and ornaments etc. 
will be the beneficial effects, if Ketu is a Yog Karak and is endowed with strength. (Ketu 
assumes the role of a Yog Karak, if he is yuti with a Yog Karak Grah (Lord of a Kendr 
and a Trikon)). 


52-54. Effects, like quarrels, tooth trouble, distress from thieves and tigers, fever, 
dysentery, leprosy and distress to wife and children etc. will be experienced, if Ketu is in 
the 6th, the 8th, or the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. If Ketu is in Dhan, or in Yuvati, 
there will be diseases, disgrace, agony and loss of wealth. 


55-56'. Effects, like acquisition of a kingdom, great enjoyment and comfort of luxuries, 
gain of elephants, horses, clothes etc., will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Sukr in the 
Dasha of Mangal, if Sukr is in a Kendr to Lagn, if Sukr is in his exaltation, or in his own 
Raéi, or, if Sukr is Lagn’s, Putr’s, or Dharm’s Lord. If Sukr is related to Lagn’s Lord, 
there will be happiness to wife and children, opulence and glory and increased good 
fortune. 


57-60. Gain of property, celebrations on the birth of a son, gain of wealth from the 
employer, acquisition of a house, land, villages etc. by the beneficence of the sovereign, 
will be the results, if Sukr is in the 5th, the 9th, the 11th, or the 2nd from the Lord of the 
Dasha. In the last part of the Dasha there will be functions of songs and dances and 
bathing in holy water. If Sukr is connected with, or related to the Lord of Karm, there 
will be construction of wells, reservoirs etc. and performance of religious, charitable and 
pious deeds. 


61-62. There will be sorrows, physical distress, loss of wealth, danger from thieves and 
the king, dissensions in the family, distress to wife and children and destruction of cattle, 
if Sukr be in the 6th, the 8th, or the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, or be associated 
with malefics. 


63. If Sukr be the Lord of the 2nd, or the 7th, there will be pains in the body in his Antar 
Dasha. For regaining good health the remedial measure to be adopted is giving a cow, or 
female buffalo in charity. 


64-66. Effects, like acquisition of conveyances, gain of reputation, birth of a son, growth 
of wealth, amicable atmosphere in the family, sound health, potency, recognition by the 
the king, extraordinary profits in business and audience with the king etc. will be 
experienced in the Antar Dasha of Strya in the Dasha of Mangal, if Stirya is in his 
exaltation, in his own Rasi, or, if Strya is in a Kendr, in a Trikon, or in Labh along with 
Karm’s Lord and with Labh’s Lord. 


67-67'4. Distress to the body, agony, failure in ventures, possibilities of suffering from 


troubles in the forehead, fever, dysentery etc. will be the effects, if Stirya is in the 6th, 
the 8th, or the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, or, if Surya is associated with malefics. 


68-69. There will be attacks of fever, danger from snakes and poison and distress to son, 
if Surya be the Lord of the 2nd, or the 7th. The remedial measure to gain good health 
and wealth is to perform worship of Surya in the prescribed manner. 


70-73. Acquisition of more kingdom, gain of perfumes, clothes, construction of 
reservoirs, shelters for cows etc., celebrations of auspicious functions, like marriage etc., 
happiness to wife and children, good relations with parents, acquisition of property by 
the beneficence of the sovereign, success in the desired projects will be the effects in the 
Antar Dasha of Candr in the Dasha of Mangal, if Candr is in her exaltation Rasi, or in 
her own Rasi, or in a Kendr, or in Dharm, or in Bandhu, or in Karm, or in Lagn along 
with the Lords of those Bhavas. The good effects will be realized in full, if Candr is 
waxing. Waning Candr will reduce the impact of the effects to some extent. 


74-76. The effects, like death, distress to wife and children, loss of lands, wealth and 
cattle and danger of a war etc. will be experienced, if Candr is in his debilitation Rasi, 
or, if Candr is in his enemy Rasi, or, if Candr is in Ari, in Randhr, or in Vyaya from 
Lagn, or from the Lord of the Dasha. There will be the possibility of premature death, 
distress to the body and mental agony, if Candr is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The 
remedial measures to be adopted to obtain relief from the above evil effects, are 
recitation of Mantras of the Goddess Durga and the Goddess Lakshmi. 


Ch. 55. Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Rahu 


1-4. Effects, like acquisition of a kingdom, enthusiasm, cordial relations with the king, 
happiness from wife and children and increase in property, will be derived in the Antar 
Dasha of Rahu in the Dasha of Rahu, if Rahu is in Kark, Vrischik, Kanya, or Dhanu and 
is in Sahaj, Ari, Karm, or Labh, or is yuti with a Yog Karak Grah in his exaltation Rasi. 


5-6. There will be danger from thieves, distress from wounds, antagonism with 
government officials, destruction of kinsmen, distress to wife and children, if Rahu is in 
Randhr, or Vyaya, or be associated with malefics. 


7. If Rahu is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord, or is in Dhan, or Yuvati, there will be distress and 
diseases. To obtain relief from the above evil effects Rahu should be worshipped (by 
recitation of his Mantras) and by giving in charity things, connected with, or ruled by 
Rahu. 


8-12’. Effects, like gain of position, patience, destruction of foes, enjoyment, cordial 
relations with the king, regular increase in wealth and property, like the growth of Candr 


of the bright half of the month (Shukla Paksh), gain of conveyance and cows, audience 
with the king by performing journey to the West, or South-East, success in the desired 
ventures, return to one’s homeland, doing good for Brahmins, visit to holy places, gain 
of a village, devotion to deities and Brahmins, happiness from wife, children and grand 
children, availability of sweetish preparations daily etc. will be derived in the Antar 
Dasha of Guru in the Dasha of Rahu, if Guru is in his exaltation, in his own Rasi, in his 
own Navans, or in his exalted Navans, or, if Guru is in a Kendr, or in a Trikon with 
reference to Lagn. 


13-14%. Loss of wealth, obstacles in work, defamation, distress to wife and children, 
heart disease, entrustment of governmental authority etc. will result, if Guru is in his 
debilitation Rasi, is combust, is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, is in an enemy R&si, or is 
associated with malefics. 


15-17. There will be gains of land, good food, gains of cattle etc., inclinations towards 
charitable and religious work etc., if Guru is in a Kendr, in a Trikon, the 11th, the 2nd, or 
the 3rd from the Lord of the Dasha and is endowed with strength. 


18-20. Loss of wealth and distress to body will result, if Guru is in the 6th, the 8th, or 
the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, or, if Guru is associated with malefics. There will 
be danger of premature death, if Guru is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The person will get 
relief from the above evil effects and enjoy good health by the beneficence of the Lord 
Shiva, if he worships his idol, made of gold. 


21-24. Effects, like pleasure of the king for devotion in his service, auspicious functions, 
like celebration of marriage etc. at home, construction of a garden, reservoir etc., gain of 
wealth and cattle from well-to-do persons, belonging to the Sudra class, loss of wealth 
caused by the king during journey to the West, reduction in income, due to lethargy, 
return to homeland, will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Sani in the Dasha of Rahu, if 
Sani is in a Kendr, in a Trikon, in his exaltation, in his own RAsi, in his Multrikon, in 
Sahaj, or in Labh. 


25-26. Danger from menials, the king and enemies, distress to wife and children, distress 
to kinsmen, disputes with the coparceners, disputes in dealings with others, but sudden 
gain of ornaments, will result, if Sani is in his debilitation Rasi, in his enemy’s Rasi, or 
in Randhr, or Vyaya. 


27-29. There will be heart disease, defamation, quarrels, danger from enemies, foreign 
journeys, affliction with Gulma, unpalatable food and sorrows etc., if Sani is in the 6th, 
the 8th, or the 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. Premature death is likely, if Sani is 
Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. Remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects 
and to regain good health is giving a black cow, or a she-buffalo in charity. 


30-33. Auspicious effects, like Raj Yog, well being in the family, profits and gain of 
wealth in business, comforts of conveyances, marriage and other auspicious functions, 
increase in the number of cattle, gain of perfumes, comforts of bed, women etc., will be 
derived in the Antar Dasha of Budh in the Dasha of Rahu, if Budh is in his exaltation 
Rasi, in a Kendr, or in Putr and, if Budh is endowed with strength. Good results, like Raj 
Yog, beneficence of the king and gain of wealth and reputation, will be realized 
particularly on Wednesday in the month of Budh. 


34-35. Sound health, Isht Siddhi, attending discourse on Puranas and ancient history, 
marriage, offering of oblations, charities, religious inclination and sympathetic attitude 
towards others will result, if Budh is in a Kendr, in the 11th, 3rd, 9th, or 10th from the 
Lord of the Dasha. 


36-38. There will be opprobrium (Ninda) of deities and Brahmins by the native, loss of 
fortune, speaking lies, unwise actions, fear from snakes, thieves and the government, 
quarrels, distress to wife and children etc., if Budh is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, or, if 
Budh receives a Drishti from Sani. 


39. If Budh is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord, there will be fear of premature death. Remedial 
measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects is recitation of Vishnu Sahasranam. 


40-41. During the Antar Dasha of Ketu in the Dasha of Rahu there will be journeys to 
foreign countries, danger from the king, rheumatic fever etc. and loss of cattle. If Ketu is 
yuti with Randhr’s Lord, there will be distress to the body and mental tension. 
Enjoyment, gain of wealth, recognition by the king, acquisition of gold etc. will be the 
results, if Ketu is associated with, or receives a Drishti from benefics. 


42-42’. There will be Isht Siddhi, if Ketu is related to the Lord of Lagn. If he is 
associated with the Lord of Lagn, there will definitely be gain of wealth. There will also 
definitely be increase in the number of cattle, if Ketu is in a Kendr, or in a Trikon. 


43-45. Effects, like danger from thieves and snakes, distress from wounds, separation 
from parents, antagonistic relations with kinsmen, mental agony etc. will be derived, if 
Ketu is without strength in Randhr, or Vyaya. If Ketu is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord, there 
will be distress to the body. The remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil 
effects is giving a goat in charity. 


46-47'/. Effects, like gains of wealth through Brahmins, increase in the number of cattle, 
celebrations for the birth of a son, well-being, recognition from government, acquisition 
of a kingdom, attainment of a high position in government, great enjoyment and 
comforts etc. will be experienced in the Antar Dasha of Sukr in the Dasha of Rahu, if 


Sukr is with strength in a Kendr, in a Trikon, or in Labh. 


48-504. Construction of a new house, availability of sweet preparations, happiness from 
wife and children, association with friends, giving of grains etc. in charity, beneficence 
of the king, gain of conveyances and clothes, extraordinary profits in business, 
celebration of Upasayan ceremony of wearing the sacred thread (Janou) etc. will be the 
auspicious results, if Sukr be in his exaltation, in his own Raéi, in is exalted, or in his 
own Navans. 


51-534. There will be diseases, quarrels, separation from one’s son, or father, distress to 
kinsmen, disputes with coparceners, danger of death to oneself, or to one’s employer, 
unhappiness to wife and children, pain in the stomach etc., if Sukr is in Ari, Randhr, or 
Vyaya, in his debilitation, or in an enemy’s Rasi, or, if Sukr is associated with Sani, 
Mangal, or Rahu. 


54-5572, Enjoyments from perfumes, bed, music etc., gain of a desired object, 
fulfillment of desires will be the results, if Sukr is in a Kendr, in a Trikon, in the 11th, or 
in the 10th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


56-59. Effects, like danger from the wrath of Brahmins, snakes and the king, possibility 
of affliction with diseases, like stoppage of urine, diabetes, pollution of blood, anaemia, 
availability of only coarse food, nervous disorder, imprisonment, loss of wealth, as a 
result of penalties, or fines, imposed by government, will be derived, if Sukr is 
associated with malefics in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. There will 
be distress to wife and children, danger of premature death to oneself, if Sukr is Dhan’s, 
or Yuvati’s Lord. Remedial measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects are 
worship of Goddess Durga and Goddess Lakshmi. 


60-6114. Effects, like cordial relations with the king, increase in wealth and grains, some 
popularity/respect, some possibility of becoming head of a village etc., will be 
experienced in the Antar Dasha of Strya in the Dasha of Rahu, if Surya is in his 
exaltation, in his own Rasi, in Labh, in a Kendr, or in a Trikon, or in his exalted, or own 
Navans. 


62-63’. There will be good reputation and encouragement and assistance by 
government, journeys to foreign countries, acquisition of the sovereignty of the country, 
gains of elephants, horses, clothes, ornaments, fulfillment of ambitions, happiness to 
children etc., if Stirya is associated with, or receives a Drishti from Lagn’s, Dhan’s, or 
Karm’s Lord. 


64-65. Fevers, dysentery, other diseases, quarrels, antagonism with the king, travels, 
danger from foes, thieves, fire etc. will be the results, if Strya is in his debilitation Rasi, 


or, if Strya is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


66. Well-being in every way and recognition from kings in foreign countries will be the 
results, if Surya is in a Kendr, in a Trikon, in the 3rd, or in the 11th from the Lord of the 
Dasha. 


67. There will be danger of critical illness, if Siirya is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. Worship 
of Strya is the remedial measure, recommended to obtain relief from the above evil 
effects. 


68-70. Effects, like acquisition of a kingdom, respect from the king, gains of wealth, 
sound health, gains of garments and ornaments, happiness from children, comforts of 
conveyances, increase in house and landed property etc., will be derived in the Antar 
Dasha of Candr in the Dasha of Rahu, if Candr is in his exaltation, in his own Rasi, in a 
Kendr, Trikon, or in Labh, or, if Candr is in a friendly Rasi, receiving a Drishti from 
benefics. 


71-72. Beneficence of the Goddess Lakshmi, all-round success, increase in wealth and 
grains, good reputation and worship of deities will be the results, if Candr is in the 5th, 
9th, in a Kendr, or in the 11th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


73-75. There will be the creation of disturbances at home and in the agricultural 
activities by evil spirits, leopards and other wild animals, danger from thieves during 
journeys and stomach disorders, if Candr is bereft of strength in the 6th, 8th, or 12th 
from the Lord of the Dasha. There will the possibility of premature death, if Candr is 
Dhan’s, or Vyaya’s Lord. The remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil 
effects is to give in charity a white cow, or a female buffalo. 


76-77'/. Effects, like the recovery of a lost kingdom and recovery of lost wealth, 
property at home and increase in agricultural production, gain of wealth, blessings by 
the household deity (Isht Dev), happiness from children, enjoyment of good food etc., 
will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Mangal in the Dasha of Rahu, if Mangal is in 
Labh, Putr, or Dharm, or, if Mangal is in a Kendr, if Mangal receives a Drishti from 
benefics, or, if Mangal is in his exaltation, or in his own RAsi. 


78-79'/. There will be acquisition of red-coloured garments, journeys, audience with the 
king, well-being of children and employer, attainment of the position of a Commander 
of the Army, enthusiasm and gain of wealth through kinsmen, if Mangal is in a Kendr, in 
the Sth, 9th, 3rd, or in the 11th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


80-82. Distress to wife, children and co-borns, loss of position, antagonistic relations 
with children, wife and other close relations, danger from thieves, wounds and pain in 


the body etc. will result, if Mangal is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, 
receiving a Drishti from malefics. 


83. There will be lethargy and danger of death, if Mangal is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. 
The remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects is giving a cow, or a 
bull in charity. 


Ch. 56. Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Guru 


1-3’. Effects, like sovereignty over many kings, very well endowed with riches, revered 
by the king, gains of cattle, clothes, ornaments, conveyances, construction of a new 
house and a decent mansion, opulence and glory, dawn of fortune, success in ventures, 
meetings with Brahmins and the king, extraordinary profits from the employer and 
happiness to wife and children, will be experienced in the Antar Dasha of Guru in his 
own Dasha, if Guru is in his exaltation R4si, in his own R&si, in a Kendr, or Trikon. 


4-5'4. Association with the menials, great distress, slander by coparceners, wrath of the 
employer, danger of premature death, separation from wife and children and loss of 
wealth and grains will be the results, if Guru is in his debilitation Rasi, in his debilitated 
Navans, or in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya. 


6-7. There will be pains in the body, if Guru is the Lord of Yuvati (or of Dhan). The 
remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects and to get fulfillment of 
ambitions is recitation of Rudr Japa and Shiva Sahasranam. 


8-111. Effects, like acquisition of a kingdom, gain of clothes, ornaments, wealth, grains, 
conveyances, cattle and position, happiness from son and friends etc., gains specially of 
a blue-coloured horse, journey to the West, audience with the king and receipt of wealth 
from him, will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Sani in the Dasha of Guru, if Sani is in 
his exaltation, in his own Rasi, in a Kendr, or Trikon endowed with strength. 


12-14. Loss of wealth, affliction with fever, mental agony, infliction of wounds to wife 
and children, inauspicious events at home, loss of cattle and employment, antagonism 
with kinsmen etc. will be results, if Sani is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, if Sani is combust, 
or, if Sani is in an enemy’s Ragi. 


15-15’4. There will be gain of land, house, son and cattle, acquisition of riches and 
property through the enemy etc., if Sani is in Kendr, Trikon, the 11th, or in the 2nd from 
the Lord of the Dasha. 


16-17. Effects, like loss of wealth, antagonistic relations with kinsmen, obstacles in 
industrial ventures, pains in the body, danger from the members of the family etc. will be 


realized, if Sani is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, or, if Sani is 
associated with a malefic. 


18-19. There will be fear of premature death, if Sani is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The 
remedial measures to obtain relief from these evil effects and to enjoy sound health are 
recitation of Vishnu Sahasranam and giving in charity a black cow, or a female buffalo. 


20-2174. Effects, like gains of wealth, bodily felicity, acquisition of a kingdom, gain of 
conveyances, clothes and cattle etc., will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Budh in the 
Dasha of Guru, if Budh is in his exaltation, in his own R4si, or in Kendr, in Trikon, or, if 
Budh is associated with the Lord of the Dasha. 


22-22'/. There will be increase in the number of enemies, loss of enjoyment and 
comforts, loss in business, affliction with fever and dysentery, if Budh receives a Drishti 
from Mangal. 


23-24 Gains of wealth in his own country, happiness from parents and acquisition of 
conveyances by the beneficence of the king will result, if Budh is in a Kendr, in the 5th, 
or 9th from the Lord of the Dasha, or, if Budh is in his exaltation Rasi. 


25-26. There will be loss of wealth, journeys to foreign countries, danger from thieves 
while traveling, wounds, burning sensations, eye troubles, wanderings in foreign lands, 
if Budh is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, or, if Budh is associated 
with a malefic without receiving a Drishti from a benefic. 


27-28. Distress without reason, anger, loss of cattle, loss in business, fear of premature 
death etc. will be the results, if Budh be associated with a malefic, or malefics in Ari, in 
Randhr, or in Vyaya. 


29-29'/. There will be enjoyment, gains of wealth, conveyances and clothes at the 
commencement of the Antar Dasha, even if Budh is associated with a malefic, but 
receives a Drishti from a benefic. At the end of the Dasha, however, there will be loss of 
wealth and bodily distress. 


30-31. Premature death may be expected, if Budh is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The most 
effective and beneficial remedial measure for prolongation of longevity and to obtain 
relief from other evil effects is recitation of Vishnu Sahasranam. 


32-32’. Moderate enjoyment, moderate gain of wealth, coarse food, or food, given by 
others, food, given at the time of death ceremonies and acquisition of wealth through 
undesirable means will be the results, in the Antar Dasha of Ketu in the Dasha of Guru, 
if Ketu is associated with, or receives a Drishti from a benefic. 


33-34. Effects, like loss of wealth by the wrath of the king, imprisonment, diseases, loss 
of physical strength, antagonism with father and brother and mental agony, will be 
experienced, if Ketu be in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, or be 
associated with malefics. 


35-36'4. Acquisition of a palanquin, elephants etc., beneficence of the king, success in 
the desired spheres, profits in business, increase in the number of cattle, gain of wealth, 
clothes etc. from a Yavana king (Muslim dignitary) will be the auspicious effects, if 
Ketu is in the 5th, 9th, 4th, or 10th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


37-38. There will be physical distress, if Ketu is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord (or, if Ketu is 
in Dhan, or in Yuvati. The remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects 
is performance of Mrityunjaya Japa in the prescribed manner. 


39-43. Effects, like acquisition of conveyances, like palanquin, elephants etc., gain of 
wealth by the beneficence of the king, enjoyment, gain of blue and red articles, 
extraordinary income 


from journeys to the East, well-being in the family, happiness from parents, devotion to 
deities, construction of reservoirs, charities etc., will be derived in the Antar Dasha of 
Sukr, if Sukr is in a Kendr, Trikon, or in Labh, or, if Sukr is in his own Rasi and receives 
a Drishti from a benefic, or from benefics. 


44-4474. Evil effects, like quarrels, antagonism with kinsmen, distress to wife and 
children, will be felt, if Sukr is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, or 
Lagn, or, if Sukr is in his debilitation Rasi. 


There will be quarrels, danger from the king, antagonism with the wife, disputes with 
the father-in-law and with brothers, loss of wealth etc., if Sukr is associated with Sani, or 
Rahu, or with both. 


45-47’. There will be gain of wealth, happiness from wife, meeting with the king, 
increase in the number of children, conveyances and cattle, enjoyment of music, society 
with men of learning, availability of sweetish preparations, giving help and assistance to 
kinsmen etc., if Sukr is in a Kendr, Trikon, or in the 2nd from the Lord of the Dasha. 


48-50. Loss of wealth, fear of premature death, antagonism with wife etc. will be 
experienced, if Sukr is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The remedial measure to obtain relief 


from these evil effects is giving a tawny-coloured cow, or a female buffalo in charity. 


51-53. Gain of wealth, reverence, happiness and acquisition of conveyances, clothes, 


ornaments etc., birth of children, cordial relations with the king, success in ventures etc. 
will be the auspicious results in the Antar Dasha of Surya in the Dasha of Guru, if Strya 
is in his exaltation, in his own Rasi, in a Kendr, Trikon, or in Sahaj, Labh, or Dhan and 
be endowed with strength. 


54-55’. Effects, like nervous disorder, fever, laziness, or reluctance in the performance 
of good deeds, indulgence in sins, antagonistic attitude towards all, separation from 
kinsmen and distress without reasons, will be experienced, if Surya is in Ari, Randhr, or 
Vyaya, or, if Stirya is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


56-57. There will be physical distress, if Strya is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The remedial 
measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects and to enjoy good health is recitation 
of Adhitya Hridaya Path. 


58-60%. Effects, like reverence from the king, opulence and glory, happiness from wife 
and children, availability of good food, gain of reputation by performance of good 
deeds, increase in the number of children and grandchildren, comforts by the 
beneficence of the king, religious and charitable inclinations etc., will be derived in the 
Antar Dasha of Candr in the Dasha of Guru, if Candr is in a Kendr, Trikon, or in Labh, 
or, if Candr is in her exaltation, or in her own RAsi and, if Candr is full and strong and in 
an auspicious Bhava from the Lord of the Dasha. 


61-63. There will be loss of wealth and kinsmen, wanderings in foreign lands, danger 
from the king, thieves, quarrels with coparceners, separation from a maternal uncle, 
distress to mother etc., if Candr is weak, or is associated with malefics, or, if Candr is in 
Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, or, if Candr is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


64. Physical distress will be experienced, if Candr is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The 
remedial measure to obtain relief from the above effects is Durga Saptashati Path. 


65-66. Effects, like the celebration of functions, such as marriage etc., gain of land, or 
villages, growth of strength and valour and success in all ventures, will be derived in the 
Antar Dasha of Mangal in the Dasha of Guru, if Mangal is in his exaltation, in his own 
Rasi, or in his exalted, or own Navans. 


67-68. There will be gain of wealth and grains, availability of good sweetish 
preparations, pleasure of the king, happiness from wife and children and other 
auspicious effects, if Mangal is in a Kendr, Trikon, in Labh, or Dhan and is associated 
with, or receives a Drishti from benefics. 


69-71. Loss of wealth and house, eye trouble and other inauspicious effects will be the 
results, if Mangal is in the 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, or, if Mangal is in his 


debilitation Rasi, associated with, or receiving a Drishti from malefics. The effects will 
be particularly adverse at the commencement of the Antar Dasha. There will be some 
mitigation of evil effects later. There will be physical distress and mental agony, if 
Mangal is the Lord of Dhan, or Yuvati. The remedial measure to obtain relief from the 
above evil effects and to get gains of wealth and property is to give a bull in charity. 


72-75. Effects, like attachment to Yog, gain of wealth and grains during the first five 
months, sovereignty over a village, or country, meeting with a foreign king, well-being 
in the family, journeys to distant lands, bathing in holy places, will be derived in the 
Antar Dasha of Rahu in the Dasha of Guru, if Rahu is in his exaltation, in his own Rasi, 
in his Multrikon, or, if Rahu is in a Kendr, or Trikon, or, if Rahu receives a Drishti from 
the Lord of a Kendr, or, if Rahu is associated with, or receives a Drishti from a benefic. 


76-78. Danger from thieves, snakes, the king, wounds, troubles in domestic affairs, 
antagonism with co-borns and coparceners, bad dreams, quarrels without reason, danger 
from diseases etc. will result, if Rahu is associated with a malefic, if Rahu is in the 8th, 
or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


79-80. There will be physical distress, if Rahu is in Dhan, or in Yuvati. The remedial 
measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects are Mrityunjaya Japa and giving a 
goat in charity. 


Ch. 57. Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Sani 


1-3. Effects, like acquisition of a kingdom, happiness from wife and children, 
acquisition of conveyances, like elephants, gain of clothes, attainment of the position of 
a Commander of the Army by the beneficence of the king, acquisition of cattle, villages 
and land etc., will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Sani in the Dasha of Sani, if Sani is 
in his own, in his exaltation Rasi, or in deep exaltation, or, if Sani is in a Kendr, or 
Trikon, or, if Sani is a Yog Karak. 


4-5'/. Fear, or danger from the king, getting inflicted with injuries with some weapon, 
bleeding gums, dysentery etc. will be the evil effects at the commencement of the 
Dasha, if Sani is in Randhr, or Vyaya, or, if Sani is associated with malefics in his 
debilitation Rasi. There will be danger from thieves etc., going away from the homeland, 
mental agony etc. in the middle portion of the Dasha. The last part of the Dasha will 
yield beneficial results. 


6-7. There will be danger of premature death, if Sani is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. Lord 
Shiva will afford protection and render relief, if Mrityunjaya Japa is performed in the 
prescribed manner. 


8-11. Effects, like reverence from the people, good reputation, gain of wealth, comforts 
of conveyances etc., inclination towards performance of religious sacrifices (Yagyas), 
Raj Yog, bodily felicity, enthusiasm, well-being in the family, pilgrimage to holy places, 
performance of religious rites, listening to Puranas, charities, availability of sweetish 
preparations etc., will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Budh in the Dasha of Sani, if 
Budh is in a Kendr, or Trikon. 


12-134. Acquisition of a kingdom, gain of wealth, headship of a village will be the 
effects at the commencement of the Dasha, if Budh is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya from 
Lagn, or from the Lord of the Dasha, or, if Budh is associated with Surya, Mangal and 
Rahu. Affliction with diseases, failure in all ventures, anxiety and feeling of danger etc. 
will be experienced in the middle portion and in the last part of the Dasha. 


14-15. There will be physical distress, if Budh is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The remedial 
measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects and to regain enjoyment in life are 
recitation of Vishnu Sahasranam and giving grains in charity. 


16-18. Evil effects, like loss of position, dangers, poverty, distress, foreign journeys etc., 
will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Ketu in the Dasha of Sani, even if Ketu is in his 
exaltation, in his own, in a benefic Rasi, or in a Kendr, or Trikon, or, if Ketu is 
associated with, or receives a Drishti from benefics. If Ketu is related to the Lagn’s 
Lord, there will be gain of wealth and enjoyment and bathing in holy places and visit to 
a sacred shrine at the commencement of the Antar Dasha. 


19-19'4. Gain of physical strength and courage, religious thoughts, audience with the 
king (high dignitaries of government, like president, prime minister, governor, ministers) 
and all kinds of enjoyments will be experienced, if Ketu is in a Kendr, in a Trikon, in the 
3rd, or 11th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


20-21'4. Fear of premature death, coarse food, cold fever, dysentery, wounds, danger 
from thieves, separation from wife and children etc., will be the results, if Ketu is in 
Randhr, or Vyaya from Lagn, or from the Lord of the Dasha. 


22-23. There will be physical distress, if Ketu is in Dhan, or Yuvati. Remedial measure 
to obtain relief from the above evil effects and to regain enjoyments of life by the 
beneficence of Ketu is giving a goat in charity. 


24-27'/. Effects, like marriage, birth of a son, gain of wealth, sound health, well-being in 
the family, acquisition of a kingdom, enjoyments by the beneficence of the king, 
honours, gain of clothes, ornaments, conveyance and other desired objects, will be 
derived in the Antar Dasha of Sukr in the Dasha of Sani, if Sukr is in a Kendr, Trikon, or 
in Labh, associated with, or receiving a Drishti from benefics. If during the period of 


Antar Dasha of Sukr Guru is favourable in transit, there will be dawn of fortune and 
growth of property. If Sani is favourable in transit, there will be Raj Yog effects, or the 
accomplishment of Yog rites (Yog Triya Siddhi). 


28-29. Distress to wife, loss of position, mental agony, quarrels with close relations etc. 
will be the results, if Sukr is in his debilitation Rasi, if Sukr is combust, or, if Sukr is in 
Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya. 


30-31’. Fulfillment of ambitions by the beneficence of the king, charities, performance 
of religious rites, creation of interest in the study of Shastras, composition of poems, 
interest in Vedanta etc., listening to Puranas, happiness from wife and children will be 
experienced, if Sukr is in Dharm, Labh, or Kendr from the Lord of the Dasha. 


32-34. There will be eye trouble, fevers, loss of good conduct, dental problems, heart 
disease, pain in arms, danger from drowning, or falling from a tree, antagonism towards 
relations with the officials of government and brothers, if Sukr is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th 
from the Lord of the Dasha. 


35-36. There will be physical distress, if Sukr is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The remedial 
measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects and to regain enjoyment and good 
health is by the beneficence of Goddess Durga and the performance of Durga Saptashati 
Path and giving a cow, or a female buffalo in charity. 


37-38'/. Effects, like good relations with one’s employer, well-being in the family, 
happiness from children, gain of conveyances and cattle etc., will be derived in the Antar 
Dasha of Sirya in the Dasha of Sani, if Siirya is in his exaltation, in his own Ragi, or, if 
Surya 1s associated with Dharm’s Lord, or, if Surya is in a Kendr, or Trikon, associated 
with, or receiving a Drishti from benefics. 


39-41. There will be heart disease, defamation, loss of position, mental agony, separation 
from close relatives, obstacles in industrial ventures, fevers, fears, loss of kinsmen, loss 
of articles, dear to the person, if Stirya is in Randhr, or Vyaya, or, if Stirya is in the 8th, 
or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


42. There will be physical distress, if Surya is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The worship of 
Surya 1s the remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects. 


43-45. Effects, like gains of conveyance, garments, ornaments, improvement of fortune 
and enjoyments, taking care of brothers, happiness in both maternal and paternal homes, 
increase in cattle wealth etc., will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Candr in the Dasha 
of Sani, if Candr is full, in her exaltation, or in her own Raéi, or in a Kendr, or Trikon, or 
in the 11th from the Dasha Lord, or, if Candr receives a Drishti from benefics. 


46-48'4. There will be great distress, wrath, separation from parents, ill health of 
children, losses in business, irregular meals, administration of medicines, if Candr is 
waning, if Candr is associated with, or receives Drishti from malefics, or, if Candr is in 
his debilitation Rasi, or, if Candr is in malefic Navans, or, if Candr is in the Rasi of a 
malefic Grah. There will, however, be good effects and some gain of wealth at the 
commencement of the Antar Dasha. 


49-50'2. Enjoyment of conveyances and garments, happiness from kinsmen, happiness 
from parents, wife, employer etc. will be the results, if Candr is in a Kendr, Trikon, or in 
the 11th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


51-52. Effects, like sleepiness, lethargy, loss of position, loss of enjoyments, increase in 
the number of enemies, antagonism with kinsmen, will be experienced, if Candr is weak 
and is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


53-54. There will be lethargy and physical distress, if Candr is Dhan’, or Yuvati’s Lord. 
The remedial measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects and prolongation of 
longevity are Havan and giving jaggery, Ghi, rice, mixed with curd, a cow, or a female 
buffalo in charity. 


55-57. Effects, like enjoyments, gain of wealth, reverence from the king, gain of 
conveyances, clothes and ornaments, attainment of the position of a Commander of the 
Army, increase in agricultural and cattle wealth, construction of a new house, happiness 
to kinsmen, will be derived from the very commencement of the Antar Dasha of Mangal 
in the Dasha of Sani, if Mangal is in his exaltation, in his own R&si, or, if Mangal is 
associated with Lagn’s Lord, or with the Dasha Lord. 


58-60. There will be loss of wealth, danger of wounds, danger from thieves, snakes, 
weapons, gout and other similar diseases, distress to father and brothers, quarrels with 
copartners, loss of kinsmen, coarse food, going away to foreign lands, unnecessary 
expenditure etc., if Mangal is in his debilitation Rasi, or combust, or in Randhr, or Vyaya 
and associated with, or receiving a Drishti from malefics. 


61-62. Great distress, dependence on others and fear of premature death, may be 
expected, if Mangal is in Dhan, or, if Mangal is Yuvati’s, or Randhr’s Lord. The 
remedial measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects are performance of Havan 
and giving a bull in charity. 


63-64. Effects, like quarrels, mental agony, physical distress, agony, antagonism with the 
sons, danger from diseases, unnecessary expenditure, discord with close relations, 
danger from the government, foreign journeys, loss of house and agricultural lands, will 


be derived in the Antar Dasha of Rahu in the Dasha of Sani, if Rahu not be in his house 
of exaltation, or any other auspicious position. 


65-67. Enjoyment, gains of wealth, increase in agricultural production, devotion to 
deities and Brahmins, pilgrimage to holy places, increase in cattle wealth, well-being in 
the family will be the results at the commencement of the Antar Dasha, if Rahu is 
associated with Lagn’s Lord, or a Yog Karak Grah, or, if Rahu is in his exaltation, or in 
his own RAsi, or, if Rahu is in a Kendr, or Labh from Lagn, or from the Lord of the 
Dasha. There will be cordiality with the king and happiness from friends in the middle 
portion of the Antar Dasha. 


68-68. There will be acquisition of elephants, opulence and glory, cordial relations 
with the king, gains of valuable clothes, if Rahu is in Mesh, Kanya, Kark, Vrishabh, 
Meen, or Dhanu. 


69-70. There will be physical distress, if Rahu is associated with Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s 
Lord. The remedial measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects are Mrityunjaya 
Japa and giving a goat in charity. 


71-73’. Effects, like success all-round, well-being in the family, gain of conveyances, 
ornaments and clothes by the beneficence of the king, reverence, devotion to deities and 
the preceptor, association with men of learning, happiness from wife and children etc., 
will be 


derived in the Antar Dasha of Guru in the Dasha of Sani, if Guru is in a Kendr, or ina 
Trikon, or, if Guru is associated with Lagn’s Lord, or, if Guru is in his own, or in his 
exaltation Rasi. 


74-75’. Results, like death of the near relations, loss of wealth, antagonism with the 
government officials, failure in projects, journeys to foreign lands, affliction with 
diseases, like leprosy etc., will be experienced, if Guru is in his debilitation Rasi, or, if 
Guru is associated with malefics, or, if Guru is in Ari, Sahaj, or Vyaya. 


76-78. There will be opulence and glory, happiness to wife, gains through the king, 
comforts of good food and clothes, religious-mindedness, name and fame in the country, 
interest in Vedas and Vedanta, performance of religious sacrifices, giving grains etc. in 
charity, if Guru is in the Sth, 9th, 11th, 2nd, or Kendr from the Lord of the Dasha. 


79-80. Antagonism with kinsmen, mental agony, quarrels, loss of position, losses in 
ventures, loss of wealth, as a result of imposition of fines, or penalties by government, 
imprisonment distress to wife and son will be the results, if Guru is weak and is in the 
6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


81-82. There will be physical distress, agony, death of the native, or any member of the 
family, if Guru is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. Remedial measures to obtain relief from the 
above evil effects are recitation of Shiva Sahasranam and giving gold in charity. 


Ch. 58. Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Budh 


1-3'4. Gain of jewels, like pearls etc., learning, increase in happiness and performance of 
pious deeds, success in the educational sphere, acquisition of name and fame, meeting 
with new kings, gain of wealth and happiness from wife, children and parents will be the 
effects in the Antar Dasha of Budh in his own Dasha, if Budh is placed in his exaltation 
Rasi, or is otherwise well placed. 


There will be loss of wealth and cattle, antagonism with kinsmen, diseases, like stomach 
pains, piety in discharging duties, as a government official, if Budh is in his debilitation 
Rasi etc., or, if Budh is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, or, if Budh is associated with malefics. 


4-5. Distress to wife, death of members of the family, affliction with diseases, like 
rheumatism and stomach pains etc. will result, if Budh is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. 
Remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects, is recitation of Vishnu 
Sahasranam. 


6-84. Effects, like physical fitness, little gain of wealth, affectionate relations with 
kinsmen, increase in cattle wealth, income from industries, success in the educational 
sphere, acquisition of name and fame, honours, audience with the king and joining a 
banquet with him, comforts of clothes etc., will be experienced, if Ketu is associated 
with benefics in a Kendr, or Trikon, or, if Ketu is yuti with Lagn’s Lord, or with a Yog 
Karak. The same will be the results, if Ketu is in a Kendr, or in the 11th from the Lord of 
the Dasha. 


9-11. Fall from a conveyance, distress to son, danger from the king, indulgence in sinful 
deeds, danger from scorpions etc., quarrels with the menials, sorrow, diseases and 
association with menials etc. will be the results, if Ketu is yuti with malefics in the 8th, 
or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


12. There will be physical distress, if Ketu is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The remedial 
measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects, is giving a goat in charity. 


13-1514. Effects, like inclination to perform religious rites, fulfillment of all ambitions 
through the help of the king and friends, gains of agricultural lands and happiness etc. 
will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Sukr in the Dasha of Budh, if Sukr is in a Kendr, in 
Labh, in Putr, or in Dharm. There will be acquisition of a kingdom, gain of wealth and 


property, construction of a reservoir, readiness to give charities and to perform religious 
rites, extraordinary gain of wealth and gains in business, if Sukr is in a Kendr, in the Sth, 
9th, or 11th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


16-17’. Heart disease, defamation, fevers, dysentery, separation from kinsmen, physical 
distress and agony will result, if Sukr is weak in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord, or 
the Dasha. 


18-19. There will be fear of premature death, if Sukr is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The 
remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects is to recite Mantras of 
Goddess Durga. 


20-22. Effects, like dawn of fortune by the beneficence of the king, happiness from 
friends etc., will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Surya in the Dasha of Budh, if Stirya 
is in his own, or in his exaltation Rasi, or in a Kendr, or Trikon, or in Dhan, or Labh, or 
in his exalted, or own Navans. There will be acquisition of land, if Surya receives a 
Drishti from Mangal and comforts of good food and clothes, if such a Surya receives a 
Drishti from Lagn’s Lord. 


23-24. Fear, or danger from thieves, fire and weapons, bilious troubles, headaches, 
mental agony and separation from friends etc. will be the results, if Surya is in Ari, 
Randhr, or Vyaya from Lagn, or from the Lord of the Dasha and, if Stirya is weak and 
associated with Sani, Mangal and Rahu. 


25. There will be fear of premature death, if Siirya is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. Worship 
of Strya is the remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects. 


26-27. The Yog becomes very strong for beneficial effects, if in the Antar Dasha of 
Candr in the Dasha of Budh Candr is in a Kendr, or Trikon from Lagn, or, if Candr is in 
her exaltation, or in her own RAsi, associated with, or receiving a Drishti from Guru, or, 
if Candr is a Yog Karak herself. Then there will be marriage, birth of a son and gain of 
clothes and ornaments. 


28-29%. In the circumstances, mentioned above, there will also be construction of a new 
house, availability of sweetish preparations, enjoyment of music, study of Shastras, 
journey to the South, gains of clothes from beyond the seas, gain of gems, like pearls 
etc. 


30-3114. There will be physical distress, if Candr is in her debilitation, or in an enemy’s 
Rasi. If Candr is in a Kendr, Trikon, in the 3rd, or 11th from the Lord of the Dasha, there 
will be at the commencement of the Antar Dasha visits to sacred shrines, patience, 
enthusiasm and gains of wealth from foreign countries. 


32-33. Danger from the king, fire and thieves, defamation, or disgrace and loss of wealth 
on account of wife, destruction of agricultural lands and cattle etc. will be the results, if 
Candr is weak and is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


34-35. There will be physical distress, if Candr is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. There will 
be relief, prolongation of longevity and restoration of comforts by the beneficence of 
Goddess Durga, if the Mantras of the Goddess are recited in the prescribed manner and 
clothes are given in charity. 


36-38’. Effects, like well-being and enjoyments in the family by the beneficence of the 
king, increase in property, recovery of a lost kingdom etc., birth of a son, satisfaction, 
acquisition of cattle, conveyances and agricultural lands, happiness from wife etc., will 
be derived in the Antar Dasha of Mangal in the Dasha of Budh, if Mangal is in his 
exaltation, in his own Rasi, in a Kendr, or Trikon, or, if Mangal is asociated with Lagn’s 
Lord. 


39-40’. Physical distress, mental agony, obstacles in industrial ventures, loss of wealth, 
gout, distress from wounds and danger from weapons and fever etc. will be the results, if 
Mangal be associated with, or receives a Drishti from malefics in Randhr, or in Vyaya. 


41-42. There will be gain of wealth, physical felicity, birth of a son, good reputation, 
affectionate relations etc. with kinsmen etc., if Mangal recieves a Drishti from benefics 
in a Kendr, Trikon, or in the 11th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


43-44'/. If Mangal be associated with malefics in the 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the 
Dasha, there will be distress, danger from kinsmen, wrath of the king and fire, 
antagonism with the son, loss of position at the commencement of the Antar Dasha, 
enjoyments and gains of wealth in the middle portion of the Antar Dasha, danger from 
the king and loss of position at the end of the Antar Dasha. 


45-46. There will be fear of premature death, if Mangal is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The 
remedial measures to be adopted to obtain relief from the above evil effects are 
Mrityunjaya Japa and giving a cow in charity. 


47-49. Effects, like reverence from the king, good reputation, gain of wealth, visits to 
sacred shrines, performance of religious sacrifices and oblations, recognition, gain of 
clothes etc., are derived in the Antar Dasha of Rahu in the Dasha of Budh, if Rahu is in a 
Kendr, or Trikon, or, if Rahu is in Mesh, Kumbh, Kanya, or Vrishabh. There will be 
some evil effects at the commencement of the Antar Dasha, but all will be well later. 


51. There will be an opportunity to have conversation, or a meeting with the king, if 


Rahu is in Sahaj, Randhr, Karm, or Labh. In this position, if Rahu be associated with a 
benefic, there will be a visit to a new king. 


52-53. Pressure of hard work, as a government functionary, loss of position, fears, 
imprisonment, diseases, agony to self and kinsmen, heart disease, loss of reputation and 
wealth, will be the results, if Rahu is associated with a malefic, or malefics in the 8th, or 
12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


54-55. There will be fear of premature death, if Rahu is in Dhan, or in Ari. The remedial 
measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects, are recitation of Mantras of 
Goddess Durga and Goddess Lakshmi in the prescribed manner and giving a tawny- 
coloured cow, or female buffalo in charity. 


56-58'. Effects, like physical felicity, gain of wealth, beneficence of the king, 
celebration of auspicious functions, like marriage etc., at home, availability of sweetish 
preparations, increase in cattle wealth, attending discourses on Puranas etc., devotion to 
deities and the preceptor, interest in religion, charities etc., worship of Lord Shiva etc., 
will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Guru in the Dasha of Budh, if Guru is in a Kendr, 
Trikon, or in Labh, or, if Guru is in his exaltation, or in his own Rasi. 


59-61. Discord with king and kinsmen, danger from thieves etc., death of parents, 
disgrace, punishment from government, loss of wealth, danger from snakes and poison, 
fever, losses in agricultural production, loss of lands etc., will be the results, if Guru is in 
his debilitation R4si, is combust, or is in Ari, Randhr, or in Vyaya, or, if Guru is 
associated with, or receives a Drishti from Sani and Mangal. 


62-63'%. There will be happiness from kinsmen and from one’s son, enthusiasm, increase 
in wealth and name and fame, giving grains etc. in charity, if Guru is in a Kendr, Trikon, 
or in the 11th from the Lord of the Dasha and, if Guru is endowed with strength. 


64-644. Agony, anxiety, danger from diseases, antagonism with wife and kinsmen, 
wrath of the king, quarrels, loss of wealth, danger from Brahmins will be the results, if 
Guru is weak and, if Guru is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


65-66. There will be physical distress, if Guru is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord, or, if Guru is 
in Dhan, or Yuvati. The remedial measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects 
are recitation of Shiva Sahasranam and giving a cow and gold in charity. 


67-6814. Effects, like well-being in the family, acquisition of a kingdom, enthusiasm, 
increase in cattle wealth, gain of a position, visits to sacred shrines etc., will be derived 
in the Antar Dasha of Sani in the Dasha of Budh, if Sani is in his exaltation, his in his 
own Rasi, or in a Kendr, or Trikon, or in Labh. 


69-70’. Danger from enemies, distress to wife and children, loss of thinking power, loss 
of kinsmen, loss in ventures, mental agony, journeys to foreign lands and bad dreams 
will be the results, if Sani is in the 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


71-72. There will be fear of premature death, if Sani is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The 
remedial measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects and to regain sound health 
are performance of Mrityunjaya Japa and giving a black cow and female buffalo in 
charity. 


Ch. 59. Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Ketu 


1-2'4. Effects, like happiness from wife and children, recognition from the king, but 
mental agony, gain of land, village etc. will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Ketu in his 
own Dasha, if Ketu is in a Kendr, or Trikon, or, if Ketu is related to Dharm’s, Karm’s, or 
Bandhu’s Lord. 


3-4. Heart disease, defamation, destruction of wealth and cattle, distress to wife and 
children, instability of mind etc. will we be the results, if Ketu is in his debilitation Rasi 
and, if Ketu is in Randhr, or Vyaya along with a combust Grah. 


5-6. There will be danger from diseases, great distress and separation from kinsmen, if 
Ketu is related to Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord, or, if Ketu is in Dhan, or Yuvati. The 
remedial measures 


to obtain relief from the above evil effects are performance of Durga Saptashati Japa and 
Mrityunjaya Japa. 


7-9'. Effects, like beneficence from the king, good fortune, gain of clothes etc., 
recovery of lost kingdom, comforts of conveyances etc., visits to sacred shrines and gain 
of lands and villages by the beneficence of the king, will be derived in the Antar Dasha 
of Sukr in the Dasha of Ketu, if Sukr is in his exaltation, in his own Raéi, or, if Sukr is 
associated with Karm’s Lord in a Kendr, or Trikon and there will be dawn of fortune, if 
in such position he is associated with Dharm’s Lord also. 


10-11. Sound health, well-being in the family and gains of good food and conveyances 
etc. will be the results, if Sukr is in a Kendr, Trikon, or in the 3rd, or 11th from the Lord 
of the Dasha. 


12-14. There will be quarrels without any cause, loss of wealth, distress to cattle, if Sukr 
is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. If Sukr is in his debilitation Rasi, 
or, if Sukr is associated with a debilitated Grah, or, if Sukr is in Ari, or Randhr, there will 


be quarrels with kinsmen, headaches, eye troubles, heart disease, defamation, loss of 
wealth and distress to cattle and wife. 


15. Physical distress and mental agony will be caused, if Sukr is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s 
Lord. The remedial measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects are performance 
of Durga Path and giving a tawny-coloured cow, or female buffalo in charity. 


16-17. The effects, like gains of wealth, beneficence of the king, performance of pious 
deeds and fulfillment of all ambitions, will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Stirya in the 
Dasha Ketu, if Siirya is in his exaltation, in his own RAsi, or, if Surya is associated with, 
or receives a Drishti from a benefic in a Kendr, Trikon, or in Labh. 


18-19'4. Danger from the king, separation from parents, journeys to foreign lands, 
distress from thieves, snakes and poison, punishment by government, antagonism with 
the friends, sorrows, danger from fever etc. will be the results, if Surya is associated 
with a malefic, or malefics in Randhr, or in Vyaya. 


20-21. There will be physical fitness, gain of wealth, or the birth of a son, success in 
performance of pious deeds, headship of a small village etc., if Stirya is in a Kendr, 
Trikon, in the 2nd, or 11th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


22-24. Obstacles in availability of food, fears and loss of wealth and cattle will be the 
results, if Surya is associated with evil Grahas in the 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the 
Dasha. There will be distress at the commencement of the Antar Dasha with some 
mitigation at its end. There will be fear of premature death, if Sirya is Dhan’s, or 
Yuvati’s Lord. The remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects and to 
regain comforts by the beneficence of Surya is to give a cow and gold in charity. 


25-28. Effects, like recognition from the king, enthusiasm, well-being, enjoyments, 
acquisition of a house, lands etc., abnormal gains of food, clothes, conveyances, cattle 
etc., success in business, construction of reservoirs etc. and happiness to wife and 
children, will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Candr in the Dasha of Ketu, if Candr is in 
her exaltation, in her 


own Rasi, in a Kendr, Trikon, in Labh, or in Dhan. The beneficial results will be realized 
fully, if Candr is waxing. 


29-30. Unhappiness and mental agony, obstacles in ventures, separation from parents, 
losses in business, destruction of cattle etc. will be caused, if Candr is in her debilitation 


Rasi, or in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya. 


31-33. There will be the acquisition of a cow, or cows, land, agricultural lands, meeting 


kinsmen and the achievement of success through them, increase in cows milk and curd, 
if Candr is in a Kendr, Trikon, or in the 11th from the Lord of the Dasha and, if Candr is 
endowed with strength. There will be auspicious results at the commencement of the 
Antar Dasha, cordial relations with the king in the middle portion of the Antar Dasha 
and danger from the king, foreign journey, or journeys to distant places at its end. 


34-36. Loss of wealth, anxiety, enmity with kinsmen and distress to brother, will be the 
results, if Candr is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. If Candr is 
Dhan’s, Yuvati’s, or Randhr’s Lord, there will be fear of premature death. The remedial 
measures to obtain relief from the above effects are recitation of Mantras of Candr and 
giving in charity things, connected with Candr. 


37-39. Effects, like acquisition of land, village etc., increase in wealth and cattle, laying 
out of a new garden, gain of wealth by the beneficence of the king, will be derived in the 
Antar Dasha of Mangal in the Dasha of Ketu, if Mangal is in his exaltation, in his own 
Rasi, if Mangal is associated with, or, receives a Drishti from benefics. If Mangal is 
related to Dharm’s, or Karm’s Lord, there will definitely be gain of land and enjoyment. 


40. There will be recognition from the king, great popularity and reputation and 
happiness from children and friends, if Mangal is in a Kendr, Trikon, or in the 3rd, or 
11th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


41-42. There will be fear of death/disaster during a foreign journey, diabetes, 
unnecessary troubles, danger from thieves and the king and quarrels, if Mangal is in the 
8th, 12th, or 2nd from the Lord of the Dasha. In the above circumstances amidst evil 
effects there will be some auspicious effects also. 


43-44. High fever, danger from poison, distress to wife, mental agony and fear of 
premature death will be the results, if Mangal is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. By the 
beneficence of Mangal there will be enjoyment and gain of property, if, as a remedial 
measure, a bull is given in charity. 


45-47. Effects, like increase of wealth and gain of wealth, grains, cattle, lands, village 
from a Yavan king, will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Rahu in the Dasha of Ketu, if 
Rahu is in his exaltation, his own, in a friends Rasi, or in a Kendr, or Trikon, or in Labh, 
or Sahaj, or Dhan. There will be some trouble at the commencement of the Dasha, but 
all will be well later. 


48-50. Frequent urination, weakness in the body, cold fever, danger from thieves, 
intermittent fever, opprobrium, quarrels, diabetes, pain in stomach will be the results, if 
Rahu is associated with a malefic in Randhr, or in Vyaya. There will be distress and 
danger, if Rahu is in Dhan, or in Yuvati. The remedial measure to obtain relief from the 


above evil effects is Durga Saptashati Path. 


51-54. Effects, like increase in wealth and grains, beneficence of the king, enthusiasm, 
gain of conveyances etc., celebration, like birth of a son at home, performance of pious 
deeds, Yagyas, conquest of the enemy and enjoyments, will be derived in the Antar 
Dasha of Guru in the Dasha of Ketu, if Guru is in his exaltation, in his own RAsi, or is 
associated with Lagn’s, Dharm’s, or Karm’s Lord in a Kendr, or Trikon. 


55-56. Danger from thieves, snakes and wounds, destruction of wealth, separation from 
wife and children, physical distress etc. will be the results, if Guru is in his debilitation 
Rasi, or in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya. Though some good effects may be felt at the 
commencement of the Antar Dasha, there will be only adverse results later. 


57-58. There will be gains of many varieties of garments, ornaments by the 
beneficence of the king, foreign journeys, taking care of kinsmen, availability of decent 
food, if Guru is associated with a benefic in a Kendr, Trikon, in the 3rd, or 11th from the 
Lord of the Dasha. 


59-60. Fear of premature death will be caused, if Guru is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The 
remedial measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects are Mrityunjaya Japa and 
recitation of Shiva Sahasranama. 


61-62’. Effects, like distress to oneself and one’s kinsmen, agony, increase in cattle 
wealth, loss of wealth, as a result of imposition of fines by government, resignation from 
the existing post, journeys to foreign lands and danger of thieves during travelling, will 
be derived in the Antar Dasha of Sani in the Dasha of Ketu, if Sani is deprived of 
strength and dignity. There will be loss of wealth and lethargy, if Sani is in Randhr, or 
Vyaya. 


63-65. Success in all ventures, happiness from the employer, comforts during journeys, 
increase in happiness and property in ones own village, audience with the king etc. will 
be the results, if Sani is in a Trikon in Meen, in Tula, in his own Ragi, or, if Sani is in an 
auspicious Navans, or is associated with a benefic in a Kendr, Trikon, or in Sahaj. 
(According to Brihat Jatak, Sani in Tula, Meen, Dhanu, Makar and Kumbh in Lagn 
gives Raj Yog). 


67-68. There will be physical distress, agony, obstacles in ventures, lethargy, 
defamation, death of parents, if Sani is associated with a malefic, in the 6th, 8th, or 12th 
from the Lord of the Dasha. Fear of premature death may be expected, if Sani is Dhan’s, 
or Yuvati’s Lord. The remedial measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects are 
performance of Havan with sesame seeds (Til) and giving a black cow, or female buffalo 
in charity. 


69-71. Effects, like acquisition of a kingdom, enjoyments, charities, gain of wealth and 
land, birth of a son, celebration of religious functions and functions, like marriage 
suddenly, well-being in the family, gain of clothes, ornaments etc., will be derived in the 
Antar Dasha of Budh in the Dasha of Ketu, if Budh is in a Kendr, or Trikon, or, if Budh 
is in his exaltation, or in his own Rasi. 


72. There will be association with men of learning, dawn of fortune and listening to 
religious discourses, if Budh is associated with Dharm’s, or Karm’s Lord. 


73-74'4. Antagonism with government officials, residing in other people’s houses, 
destruction of wealth, clothes, conveyances and cattle will be the results, if Budh is 
associated with Sani, Mangal, or Rahu in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya. There will be some 
beneficial effects at the commencement of the Dasha, still better results in the middle, 
but inauspicious at the end. 


75-76. There will be good health, happiness from one’s son, opulence and glory, 
availability of good food and clothes and abnormal profits in business, if Budh is in a 
Kendr, Trikon, or in the 11th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


77-79. Distress, unhappiness and troubles to wife and children and danger from the king 
may be expected at the commencement of the Antar Dasha, if Budh is weak in the 6th, 
8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. There will, however, be visits to sacred places 
in the middle of the Dasha. Fear of premature death will be caused, if Budh is Dhan’s, or 
Yuvati’s Lord. The remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects is 
recitation of Vishnu Sahasranam. 


Ch. 60. Effects of the Antar Dashas in the Dasha of Sukr 


1-2’. Effects, like gain of wealth, cattle etc. through Brahmins, celebrations in 
connection with the birth of a son, well-being, recognition from the king, acquisition of 
a kingdom, will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Sukr in his own Dasha, if Sukr is in a 
Kendr, Trikon, or in Labh and, if Sukr is endowed with strength. 


3-6. Construction of a new house, availability of sweet preparations, happiness to wife 
and children, companionship with a friend, giving grains etc. in charity, beneficence of 
the king, gain of clothes, conveyances and ornaments, success in business, increase in 
the number of cattle, gain of garments by performing journeys in the western direction 
etc. will be the results, if Sukr is in his exaltation, in his own Raéi, or, if Sukr is in his 
exalted, or own Navans. 


7-8. There will be acquisition of a kingdom, enthusiasm, beneficence of the king, well- 


being in the family, increase in the number of wives, children and wealth etc., if Sukr is 
associated with, or receives a Drishti from a benefic and is in a friendly Navans, in 
Sahaj, Ari, or Labh. 


9-10. Danger from thieves etc., antagonistic relations with government officials, 
destruction of friends and kinsmen, distress to wife and children may be expected, if 
Sukr is associated with, or receives a Drishti from a malefic in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya. 


11. There will be fear of death, if Sukr is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. Remedial measures 
to obtain relief from the above evil effects are Durga Path and giving a cow in charity. 


12. There will be a period of agony, wrath of the king, quarrels with the coparceners etc. 
in the Antar Dasha of Siirya in the Dasha of Sukr, if Sirya is in any Rasi, other than his 
exaltation, or debilitation Rasi. (This verse does not appear to be correctly worded, 
because Surya does produce good effects in a position, other than exaltation, or 
debilitation. The position is correctly stated in the Chowkambh version of this verse) 


13-15. Effects, like acquisition of a kingdom and wealth, happiness from wife and 
children, happiness from employer, meeting with friends, happiness from parents, 
marriage, name and fame, betterment of fortune, birth of a son etc., will be experienced, 
if Surya is in his exaltation, in his own RAsi, in a Kendr, Trikon, in Dhan, or Labh, or in 
Kendr, Trikon, in the 2nd, or 11th from the Lord of he Dasha. 


16-18. Distress, agony, distress to members of the family, harsh language, distress to 
father, loss of kinsmen, wrath of the king, danger at home, many diseases, destruction of 
agricultural 


production etc. will be the results, if Stirya is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, or, if Stirya is in 
his debilitation, or in an enemy’s Rasi. 


19-20. There will be evil influence of the Grahas, if Sirya is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. 
Worship of Stirya is the remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects. 


21-22. Effects, like gain of wealth, conveyances, clothes by the beneficence of the king, 
happiness in the family, great opulence and glory, devotion to deities and Brahmins, will 
be derived in the Antar Dasha of Candr in the Dasha of Sukr, if Candr is in her 
exaltation, or in her own RAsi, or is associated with the Lord of Dharm, benefics, or with 
Karm’s Lord, or, if Candr is in a Kendr, Trikon, or Labh. 


23-23%. In the above circumstances there will also be association with musicians and 
men of learning and receiving of decorations, gain of cows, buffaloes and other cattle, 
abnormal profits in business, dining with brothers etc. 


24-26'4. Loss of wealth, fears, physical distress, agony, wrath of the king, journeys to 
foreign lands, or pilgrimage, distress to wife and children and separation from kinsmen 
will be the results, if Candr is in her debilitation Rasi, is combust, or is in Ari, Randhr, or 
Vyaya, or, if Candr is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. 


27-29. There will be sovereignty over a province, or village by the beneficence of the 
king, clothes etc., construction of a reservoir, increase in wealth etc., if Candr is in a 
Kendr, or Trikon, or in the 3rd, or 11th from the Lord of the Dasha. There will be 
physical fitness at the commencement of the Antar Dasha and physical distress in its last 
portion. 


30-3114. Effects, like acquisition of kingdom, property, clothes, ornaments, land and 
desired objects, will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Mangal in the Dasha of Sukr, if 
Mangal is in a Kendr, or Trikon, or in Labh, or, if Mangal is in his exaltation RAsi, or is 
in one of his own RAsis, or is associated with the Lagn’s, Dharm’s, or Karm’s Lord. 


32-34. There will be fever from cold, diseases (like fever) to parents, loss of position, 
quarrels, antagonism with the king and government officials, extravagant expenditure 
etc., if Mangal is in Ari, Randhr, or Vyaya, or, if Mangal is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from 
the Lord of the Dasha. 


35. Physical distress, losses in profession, loss of village, land etc. will be the results, if 
Mangal is the Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. 


36-37’. Effects, like great enjoyment, gain of wealth, visits of friends, successful 
journeys, gain of cattle and land etc., will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Rahu in the 
Dasha of Sukr, if Rahu is in a Kendr, or Trikon, or in Labh, or, if Rahu is in his 
exaltation, or in his own RAsi, or is associated with, or receives a Drishti from benefics. 


38-39. Enjoyments, destruction of enemy, enthusiasm and beneficence of the king will 
be the results, if Rahu is in Sahaj, or Ari, or Karm, or Labh. Good effects will be 
experienced up to 5 months from the commencement of the Antar Dasha, but at the end 
of the Dasha there will be danger from fevers and indigestion. 


40-4174. In the above circumstances, except for obstacles in ventures and journeys and 
worries, there will be all enjoyment, like those of a king. Journeys to foreign lands will 
bring success and the person will return safely to his homeland. There will also be 
blessings from Brahmins and auspicious results consequent to visits to holy places. 


42-44. There will be inauspicious effects on oneself and one’s parents and antagonism 
with people, if Rahu be associated with a malefic in the 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the 


Dasha. Physical distress will be caused, if Rahu is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The 
remedial measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects is Mrityunjaya Japa. 


45-48. Effects, like recovery of the lost kingdom, acquisition of desired grains, clothes 
and property etc., reverence from one’s friend and the king and gain of wealth, 
recognition from the king, good reputation, gain of conveyances, association with an 
employer and with men of learning, industriousness in the study of Shastras, birth of a 
son, satisfaction, visits of close friends, happiness to parents and son etc., will be derived 
in the Antar Dasha of Guru in the Dasha of Sukr, if Guru is in his exaltation, in his own 
Rasi, or in a Kendr, or Trikon to Lagn, or to the Lord of the Dasha. 


49-50. There will be danger from the king and from thieves, distress to oneself and to 
kinsmen, quarrels, mental agony, loss of position, going away to foreign lands and 
danger of many kinds of diseases, if Guru is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the 
Dasha and be associated with a malefic. 


51. There will be physical distress, if Guru is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The remedial 
measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects is Mrityunjaya Japa. 


52-54. Effects, like great enjoyments, visits of friends and kinsmen, recognition from the 
king, birth of a daughter, visits to holy places and sacred shrines, conferment of 
authority by the king, will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Sani in the Dasha of Sukr, if 
Sani is in his exaltation, in his own Raéi, in a Kendr, Trikon, or in his own Navans. 


55-57. There will be lethargy and more expenditure than income, if Sani is in his 
debilitation Rasi. Many kinds of distresses and troubles at the commencement of the 
Antar Dasha, like stress to parents, wife and children, going away to foreign lands, 
losses in profession, destruction of cattle etc., will be the results, if Sani is in Randhr, or 
Labh, or Vyaya, or, if Sani is in the 8th, 11th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha. There 
will be physical distress, if Sani is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. 


58-59. The remedial measures to obtain relief from the above evil effects, are Havan 
with sesame seeds (Til), Mrityunjaya Japa, Durga Saptashati Path (by oneself, or 
through a Brahmin). 


60-62. Effects, like dawn of fortune, birth of a son, gain of wealth through judgement of 
court, listening to stories from the Puranas, association with persons, competent in 
poetry etc., visits of close friends, happiness from employer, availability of sweetish 
preparations etc., will be derived in the Antar Dasha of Budh in the Dasha of Sukr, if 
Budh is in a Kendr, or Trikon, or in Labh (from Lagn, or from the Lord of the Dasha), or 
is in his exaltation, or in his own Rasi. 


63-65. If Budh is in the 6th, 8th, or 12th from the Lord of Dasha, or, if Budh is weak, or 
is associated with a malefic, there will be agony, loss of cattle, residence in other 
people’s 


houses and losses in business. There will be some good effects at the commencement, 
moderate in the middle portion and distress from fever etc. at the end of the Antar 
Dasha. 


66. There will be physical distress, if Budh is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The remedial 
measure to obtain relief from the above evil effects is the recitation of Vishnu 
Sahasranam. 


67-68. Auspicious effects, like availability of sweetish preparations, abnormal gains in 
profession and increase in cattle wealth, will be derived from the very commencement of 
the Antar Dasha of Ketu in the Dasha of Sukr, if Ketu is in his exaltation, or in his own 
Rasi, or is related to a Yog Karak Grah, or, if Ketu is possessed of positional strength. (It 
is not laid down anywhere, in which Bhava Ketu does get positional strength). 


69-69'/. In the above circumstances there will be definite victory in war at the end of the 
Antar Dasha. Moderate results will be experienced in the middle portion of the Antar 
Dasha and sometimes there will also be the feeling of distress. 


70-72. There will be danger from snakes, thieves and wounds, loss of power of thinking, 
headache, agony, quarrels without any cause, or reason, diabetes, excessive expenditure, 
antagonism with wife and children, going away to foreign land, loss in ventures, if Ketu 
is in the 8th, or 12th from the Lord of the Dasha, or, if Ketu is associated with a malefic. 


73-74. There will be physical distress, if Ketu is Dhan’s, or Yuvati’s Lord. The remedial 
measures to obtain relief from the above effects are Mrityunjaya Japa and giving a goat 
in charity. Remedial measures for appeasing Sukr will also prove beneficial. 


Ch. 61. Effects of Pratyantar Dashas in Antar Dashas 


1. By multiplying the years etc. of the Antar Dasha of the Grahas separately by the 
Dasha years of each Grah and by dividing the product by the total span of the 
Vimshottari Dasha, namely 120 years, we will arrive at the Pratyantar Dasha of each 
Grah. 


2. Sirya-Sirya (Pratyantar Dasha of Surya in the Antar Dasha of Stirya). Argument with 
other persons, loss of wealth, distress to wife, headache etc. The above are general 
effects. Such inauspicious effects will not be produced, if Siirya is in a Trikon etc., if 
Surya 1s the Lord of an auspicious Bhava, or is in a auspicious Bhava and in a benefic 


Varg. All other Pratyanta effects should be judged in this manner. 
3. ...-Candr. Excitement, quarrels, loss of wealth, mental agony etc. 


4. ...-Mangal. Danger from the king and from weapons, imprisonment and distress from 
enemies and fire. 


5. ...-Rahu. Disorder of phlegm, danger from weapons, loss of wealth, destruction of a 
kingdom and mental agony. 


6. ...-Guru. Victory, increase in wealth, gains of gold, garments, conveyances etc. 
(7) ...-Sani. Loss of wealth, distress to cattle, excitement, diseases etc. 


8. ...-Budh. Affectionate relations with kinsmen, availability of good food, gains of 
wealth, religious-mindedness, reverence from the king. 


9. ...-Ketu. Danger to life, loss of wealth, danger from the king, trouble with enemies. 
10. ...-Sukr. Moderate effects, or some gains of wealth may be expected. 


11. Candr-Candr. Acquisition of land, wealth and property, reverence from the king and 
availability of sweetish preparations. 


12. ...-Mangal. Wisdom and discretion, reverence from the people, increase in wealth, 
enjoyments to kinsmen, but there will be danger from an enemy. 


13. ...-Rahu. Well-being, gain of wealth from the king and danger of death, if Rahu is 
yuti with a malefic. 


14. ...-Guru. Enjoyments, increase in dignity and glory, gain of knowledge through the 
preceptor, acquisition of a kingdom and acquisition of gems etc. 


15. ...-Sani. Bilious troubles, loss of wealth and name and fame. 


16. ...-Budh. Birth of a son, acquisition of a horse and other conveyances, success in 
education, progress, gain of white garments and grains. 


17. ...-Ketu. Quarrels with Brahmins, fear of premature death, loss of happiness and 
distress all-round. 


18. ...-Sukr. Gain of wealth, enjoyments, birth of a daughter, availability of sweet 


preparations and cordial relations with all. 
19. ...-Strya. Gain of happiness, grains and garments, victories everywhere. 


20. Mangal-Mangal. Danger from enemies, quarrels and fear of premature death on 
account of blood diseases. 


21. ...-Rahu. Destruction of wealth and kingdom (fall of government), unpalatable food 
and quarrels with the enemy. 


22. ...-Guru. Loss of intelligence, distress, sorrows to children, fear of premature death, 
negligence, quarrels and no fulfillment of any ambition. 


23. ...-Sani. Destruction of the employer, distress, loss of wealth, danger from enemies, 
anxiety, quarrels and sorrows. 


24. ...-Budh. Loss of intelligence, loss of wealth, fevers and loss of grains, garments and 
friends. 


25. ...-Ketu. Distress from diseases, lethargy, premature death, danger from the king and 
weapons. 


26. ...-Sukr. Distress from Chandal, sorrows, danger from the king and from weapons, 
dysentery and vomiting. 


27. ...-Strya. Increase in landed property and wealth, satisfaction, visits of friends, 
happiness all-round. 


28. ...-Candr. Gains of white garments etc. from the southern direction, success in all 
ventures. 


29. Rahu-Rahu. Imprisonment, disease, danger of injuries from weapons. 


30. ...-Guru. Reverence everywhere, acquisition of conveyances, like elephants etc., 
gain of wealth. 


31. ...-Sani. Rigorous imprisonment, loss of enjoyments, danger from enemies, 
affliction with rheumatism. 


32. ...-Budh. Gain in all ventures, abnormal gain through wife. 


33. ...-Ketu. Loss of intelligence, danger from enemies, obstacles, loss of wealth, 


quarrels, excitement. 


34. ...-Sukr. Danger from a Yogini, danger from the king, loss of conveyances, 
availability of unpalatable food, loss of a wife, sorrow in the family. 


35. ...-Strya. Danger from enemies, fevers, distress to children, fear of premature death, 
negligence. 


36. ...-Candr. Excitement, quarrels, worries, loss of reputation, fear, distress to father. 


37. ...-Mangal. Septic boil in the anus (Bhagandhar), distress, due to a bite and pollution 
of blood, loss of wealth, excitement. 


38. Guru-Guru. Acquisition of gold, increase in wealth etc. 
39. ...-Sani. Increase in lands, conveyances and grains. 


40. ...-Budh. Success in the educational sphere, acquisition of clothes and gems, like 
pearls etc., visits of friends. 


41. ...-Ketu. Danger from water and thieves. 


42. ...-Sukr. Several kinds of learning, gain of gold, clothes, ornaments, well-being and 
satisfaction. 


43. ...-Stirya. Gain from the king, friends and parents, reverence everywhere. 
44. ...-Candr. No distress, gain of wealth and conveyances, success in ventures. 


45. ...-Mangal. Danger from weapons, pain in anus, burning in the stomach, indigestion, 
distress from enemies. 


46. ...-Rahu. Antagonism with menials (Chandaldhi) and loss of wealth and distress 
through them. 


47. Sani-Sani. Physical distress, quarrels, danger from menials. 


48. ...-Budh. Loss of intelligence, quarrels, dangers, anxiety about availability of food, 
loss of wealth, danger from enemy. 


49. ...-Ketu. Imprisonment in the camp of the enemy, loss of luster, hunger, anxiety and 
agony. 


50. ...-Sukr. Fulfillment of ambitions, well-being in the family, success in ventures and 
gains therefrom. 


51. ...-Stirya. Conferment of authority by the king, quarrels in the family, fevers. 


52. ...-Candr. Development of intelligence, inauguration of big a venture, loss of luster, 
extravagant expenditure, association with many women. 


53. ...-Mangal. Loss of valour, distress to son, danger from fire and enemy, distress from 
bile and wind. 


54. ...-Rahu. Loss of wealth, clothes, land, going away to foreign lands, fear of death. 
55. ...-Guru. Inability to prevent losses, caused by women, quarrels, excitement. 
56. Budh-Budh. Gain of intelligence, education, wealth, clothes etc. 


57. ...-Ketu. Coarse food, stomach troubles, eye troubles, distress from bilious and 
blood disorders. 


58. ...-Sukr. Gains from a northern direction, loss of cattle, acquisition of authority from 
government. 


59. ...-Surya. Loss of splendour and distress through diseases, distress in the heart. 


60. ...-Candr. Marriage, gain of wealth and property, birth of a daughter, enjoyments all- 
round. 


61. ...-Mangal. Religious-mindedness, increase in wealth, danger from fire and enemies, 
gain of red clothes, injury from a weapon. 


62. ...-Rahu. Quarrels, danger from wife, or some other woman, danger from the king. 


63. ...-Guru. Acquisition of a kingdom, conferment of authority by the king, reverence 
from the king, education, intelligence. 


64. ...-Sani. Bilious and windy troubles, injuries to the body, loss of wealth. 
65. Ketu-Ketu. Sudden disaster, going away to foreign lands, loss of wealth. 


66. ...-Sukr. Loss of wealth through a non-Hindu king, eye troubles, headache, loss of 


cattle. 
67. ...-Surya. Antagonism with friends, premature death, defeat, exchange of arguments. 
68. ...-Candr. Loss of grains, physical distress, misunderstanding, dysentery. 


69. ...-Mangal. Injury from weapons, distress from fire, danger from menials and 
enemies. 


70. ...-Rahu. Danger from women and enemies, distress, caused by menials. 


71. ...-Guru. Loss of friends, wealth and garments, opprobrium in the house, troubles 
from everywhere. 


72. ...-Sani. Death of cattle and friends, physical distress, very meagre gain of wealth. 


73. ...-Budh. Loss of understanding, excitement, failure in education, dangers, failure in 
all ventures. 


74. Sukr-Sukr. Gains of white clothes, conveyances, gems, like pearls etc., association 
with beautiful damsel. 


75. ...-Stirya. Rheumatic fever, headache, danger from the king and enemies and meagre 
gain of wealth. 


76. ...-Candr. Birth of a daughter, gain of clothes etc. from the king, acquisition of 
authority. 


77. ...-Mangal. Blood and bile troubles, quarrels, many kinds of distresses. 
78. ...-Rahu. Quarrels with wife, danger, distress from the king and enemies. 


79. ...-Guru. Acquisition of kingdom, wealth, garments, gems, ornaments and 
conveyance, like elephants etc. 


80. ...-Sani. Acquisition of donkey, camel, goat, iron, grains, sesame seeds, physical 
pains. 


81. ...-Budh. Gains of wealth, knowledge, authority from the king, gain of money, 
distributed by others. 


82. ...-Ketu. Premature death, going away from homeland, gains of wealth at times. 


Ch. 62. Effects of Sukshmantar Dashas in Pratyantar Dashas 

1. The Sukshmantar Dasha is arrived at by multiplying the periods of Pratyantar Dasha 
separately for each Grah by the Dasha years of that Grah and then by dividing the 
product by 120. 


2. Sirya-Sirya (Sukshm Dasha of Surya in Pratyantar Dasha of Surya). Going away 
from homeland, danger of death, loss of position, losses all-round. 


3. ...-Candr. Devotion towards deities and Brahmins, interest in pious deeds, 
affectionate relations with friends. 


4. ...-Mangal. Indulgence in sinful deeds, distress from cruel enemies, bleeding. 
5. ...-Rahu. Danger from thieves, fire and poison, defeat in war, religious inclination. 


6. ...-Guru. Recognition by government, respected by government employees, becoming 
favourite of the king. 


7. ...-Sani. Causing trouble to respected persons and Brahmins by theft and by other 
bold deeds, going away from ones own place, mental agony. 


8. ...-Budh. Gains of fancy garments, association with a beautiful damsel, sudden 
success in ventures. 


9. ...-Ketu. Achievement of glory through wife and employees, loss of wealth, comforts 
from servants. 


10. ...-Sukr. Happiness from son, friends and wife, acquisition of many kinds of 
properties. 


11. Candr-Candr. Gain of ornaments and land, reverence, recognition from the king, 
anger, glory. 


12. ...-Mangal. Distress, antagonism with the enemy, stomach troubles, death of father, 
troubles, due to imbalance of wind and bile. 


13. ...-Rahu. Disharmony with friends and kinsmen, going away from homeland, loss of 
wealth, imprisonment. 


14. ...-Guru. Opulence and glory with royal symbols, birth of a son, gain of property, 


enjoyments all-round. 


15. ...-Sani. Wrath of the king, loss of wealth in business dealings, danger from thieves 
and Brahmins. 


16. ...-Budh. Reverence from the king, gain of wealth, gain of conveyance from a 
foreign land, increase in the number of children. 


17. ...-Ketu. Loss in the livelihood, earned by sale etc., grains, medicines, cattle etc., 
danger from fire and the sun’s rays (sun-stroke). 


18. ...-Sukr. Marriage, gain of a kingdom, land, garments, ornaments, reputation etc. 


19. ...-Siirya. Troubles, losses in ventures, destruction of grains and cattle, physical 
distress. 


20. Mangal-Mangal. Sorrows on account of loss of lands, epilepsy, imprisonment, 
unhappiness. 


21. ...-Rahu. Physical distress, danger from the people (due to unpopularity), loss of 
wife and children, danger from fire. 


22. ...-Guru. Devotion towards deities, Mantra Siddhi, reverence from the people, 
enjoyments. 


23. ...-Sani. Release from imprisonment, happiness on account of wealth, gains of 
clothes and servants. 


24. ...-Budh. Comforts of Chatr, Chamar etc. (receiving respect, as that of a king), 
breathing troubles. 


25. ...-Ketu. Indulgence in undesirable deeds at the instance of others, one always 
remains filthy. 


26. ...-Sukr. Enjoyment with women of choice, gain of wealth, food etc. 


27. ...-Strya. Wrath of the king, distress through Brahmins, failure in ventures, odium in 
public (Loka Nindha). 


28. ...-Candr. Piousness, gain of wealth, devotion towards deities and Brahmins, danger 
from diseases. 


29. Rahu-Rahu. Tendering to create turbulence by people, lack of wisdom in 
performance of duties, affliction of the mind. 


30. ...-Guru. Affliction with a chronic disease, poverty, but revered by the people and 
the religious-mindedness. 


31. ...-Sani. Gain of wealth through unfair means, wicked, or mean nature, performing 
other person’s duties, undesirable association. 


32. ...-Budh. Increase in desires for sexual acts with women, eloquence, hunger, 
physical distress. 


33. ...-Ketu. Politeness, loss of reputation, imprisonment, cold heartedness, loss of 
public money. 


34. ...-Sukr. Freedom from imprisonment, gain of position and wealth. 


35. ...-Strya. Settling down in foreign lands, affliction with Gulma, even temperament, 
comforts of conveyances. 


36. ...-Candr. Gain of gems (money), wealth, education, attachment to prayers, good 
behavior and devotion towards deities. 


37. ...-Mangal. Fleeing after defeat, anger, imprisonment, indulgence in thefts and 
stealing. 


38. Guru-Guru. Banishment of sorrows, increase in wealth, performing Havan, devotion 
to Lord Shiva, gains of conveyance, marked with royal symbols. 


39. ...-Sani. Obstacles in fasting, agony, foreign journeys, loss of wealth, antagonism 
with kinsmen. 


40. ...-Budh. Success in education, increase in intelligence, reverence from the people 
(popularity), gains of wealth, all sorts of enjoyments and comforts at home. 


41. ...-Ketu. Knowledge, glory, learning, study of Shastras, worship of Lord Shiva, 
Havan, devotion toward preceptor. 


42. ...-Sukr. Recovery from diseases, enjoyments, gain of wealth, happiness from wife 
and children. 


43. ...-Stirya. Troubles of wind and bile, stomach pains through imbalance of phlegm 


and Rasas. 


44. ...-Candr. Glory with umbrella with royal symbols, celebrations on the birth of a 
son, distress in eyes and stomach. 


45. ...-Mangal. Administration of poison by wife, imprisonment, danger from diseases, 
going away to foreign lands, confusion and misunderstandings. 


46. ...-Rahu. Danger from thieves, snakes and scorpions, diseases and distress. 


47. Sani-Sani. Loss of wealth, diseases, like rheumatism etc., destruction of the family, 
taking meals separately from the family, full of sorrows. 


48. ...-Budh. Profits in business, progress in education, increase in wealth and lands. 
49. ...-Ketu. Turbulence by thieves, leprosy, loss of livelihood, physical pains. 


50. ...-Sukr. Opulence and glory, learning the use of weapons, birth of a son, coronation, 
good health and fulfillment of all ambitions. 


51. ...-Stirya. Wrath of the king, quarrels in the family, physical distress. 


52. ...-Candr. Development of intelligence, inauguration of a big project, loss of luster, 
extravagance, happiness from wife and children. 


53. ...-Mangal. Loss of luster, excitement, burning in the stomach, misunderstanding, 
quarrels and wind and bile disorders. 


54. ...-Rahu. Death of parents, agony, extravagance, failure in ventures. 


55. ...-Guru. Acquisition of gold coins, reverence from the public, increase in wealth 
and grains, acquisition of Chatr with royal symbols. 


56. Budh-Budh. Dawn of fortune, reverence from the king, increase in wealth and 
property and affectionate relations with all. 


57. ...-Ketu. Danger from fire, agony, distress to wife, coarse food and immoral 
tendencies. 


58. ...-Sukr. Gain of conveyances, wealth, grains, produced in water, good repute and 
enjoyments. 


59. ...-Surya. Injuries, wrath of the king, confusion in the mind, diseases, loss of wealth, 
ridicule in public. 


60. ...-Candr. Good fortune, stability of mind, reverence from the king, gains of 
property, visits of friends and the preceptor. 


61. ...-Mangal. Danger from fire and poison, idiocy, poverty, confusion of mind, 
excitement. 


62. ...-Rahu. Danger from fire and snakes and the victory over an enemy (with 
difficulty), opprobrium from goblins (evil, mischievous spirit). 


63. ...-Guru. Construction of a house, interest in charities, comforts and enjoyments, 
increase in opulence, gain of wealth from the king. 


64. ...-Sani. Profits in business, progress in education and increase in wealth, marriage, 
circumambience of comprehensiveness. 


65. Ketu-Ketu. Happiness from wife and children, physical troubles, poverty, begging. 


66. ...-Sukr. Freedom from diseases, gains of wealth, devotion towards Brahmins and 
the preceptor, union with members of the family. 


67. ...-Surya. Quarrels, loss of land, residence in foreign lands, disaster upon friends. 
68. ...-Candr. Promotion in service, victory in war, good reputation in public. 


69. ...-Mangal. Danger of falling down from a horse etc., distress from thieves and the 
wicked, suffering from Gulma and headache. 


70. ...-Rahu. Destruction of wife, father etc., defamation, due to association with a 
wicked woman, vomiting, blood pollution, bilious diseases. 


71. ...-Guru. Antagonism with the enemy, increase in property and opulence, distress, 
due to losses in cattle, wealth and agricultural production. 


72. ...-Sani. Imaginary distress, little comfort, fasting, antagonism with wife, indulgence 
in falsehood. 


73. ...-Budh. Union and separation from many kinds of people, distress to the enemy, 
increase in wealth and property. 


74. Sukr-Sukr. Destruction of enemies, enjoyments, construction of temples of Lord 
Shiva etc. and reservoirs. 


75. ...-Surya. Agony in mind and heart, confusion of mind, wanderings, both losses and 
gains at different times. 


76. ...-Candr. Sound health, increase in wealth, success in ventures through business 
dealings, progress in education and increase of intelligence. 


77. ...-Mangal. Idiocy, danger from an enemy, going away from one’s homeland, danger 
from diseases. 


78. ...-Rahu. Danger from fire and snakes, destruction of kinsmen, resignation from 
position (service etc.). 


79. ...-Guru. Success in ventures, increase in wealth and agricultural production, 
abnormal profits from purchase and sale business. 


80. ...-Sani. Distress from an enemy, sorrows, destruction of cattle, loss of persons, 
belonging to the Gotra of the native and elders (preceptors). 


81. ...-Budh. Increase in wealth with the assistance of kinsmen, gain of wealth through 
business, happiness from wife and children. 


82. ...-Ketu. Danger from fire, distress from diseases, distress in mouth, eyes and 
forehead, loss of accumulated wealth, mental agony. 


Ch. 63. Effects of Prana Dashas in Sukshma Dashas 


1. If we multiply the Sukshma Dasha spans by the Dasha years of each Grah and divide 
the product by 120, we will get the Prana Dasha. 


(2) Strya-Strya. Interest in unnatural sexual intercourse, danger from thieves, fire and 
the king, physical distress. 


3. ...-Candr. Enjoyments, availability of good food, development of intelligence, 
opulence and glory, like that of a king, by the beneficence of generous people. 


4. ...-Mangal. Antagonism with the king with the connivance of others, dangers and 
great losses. 


5. ...-Rahu. Hunger, danger from poison, loss of wealth, as a result of punishment by the 


king. 


6. ...-Guru. Success in many educational spheres, gain of wealth, success in ventures, as 
a result of the exchange of visits with the king and Brahmins. 


7. ...-Sani. Imprisonment, death, excitement, obstacles and losses in ventures. 


8. ...-Budh. Feeding from the kings kitchen, acquisition of Chatr and Chamar with royal 
symbols, attainment of the position of a high dignitary in government. 


9. ...-Ketu. Loss of wealth, due to quarrels with the preceptor (elders), wife and 
kinsmen. 


10. ...-Sukr. Recognition, or reverence from the king, increase in wealth, happiness from 
wife and children, enjoyments from eating and drinking. 


11. Candr-Candr. Happiness from wife and children, gain of wealth and clothes, Yog 
Sidhi. 
12. ...-Mangal. Consumption, leprosy, destruction of kinsmen, bleeding, creation of 


turbulence by friends and goblins. 


13. ...-Rahu. Danger from snakes, creation of turbulance by evil spirits, weakness of 
eyesight, confusion of mind. 


14. ...-Guru. Growth of religious-mindedness, forgiveness, devotion towards deities and 
Brahmins, good fortune, meeting with near and dear ones. 


15. ...-Sani. Unexpected and sudden physical distress, creation of troubles by enemies, 
weakness of eyesight, gain of wealth. 


16. ...-Budh. Gift of Chamar and Chatr by the king, acquisition of a kingdom, even- 
mindedness in people. 


17. ...-Ketu. Danger from weapons, from fire, from an enemy and from poison, stomach 
troubles, separation from wife and children. 


18. ...-Sukr. Acquisition of friends and wife, gain of wealth from foreign lands, all kinds 
of enjoyments. 


19. ...-Siirya. Brutality, increase in anger, fear of death, agony, going away from the 
homeland, dangers. 


20. Mangal-Mangal. Quarrels with the enemy, imprisonment, bilious and blood pollution 
troubles. 


21. ...-Rahu. Separation from wife and children, distress, as a result of oppression by 
kinsmen, fear of death, poison. 


22. ...-Guru. Devotion towards deities, gain of wealth, competence in Mantra rituals. 


23. ...-Sani. Danger from fire, death, loss of wealth, loss of position, but good relations 
with kinsmen. 


24. ...-Budh. Gains of splendid garments, ornaments, marriage. 


25. ...-Ketu. Fear of falling down from a high place, eye troubles, danger from snakes, 
loss of reputation. 


26. ...-Sukr. Gain of wealth, reverence amongst people, enjoyment of many kinds of 
luxuries. 


27. ...-Surya. Fevers, lunacy, loss of wealth, wrath of the king, poverty. 
28. ...-Candr. Comforts of good food and garments, distress from heat and cold. 


29. Rahu-Rahu. Loss of taste in eating, danger from poison, loss of wealth through 
rashness. 


30. ...-Guru. Physical well-being, fearlessness, gain of conveyance and quarrels with 
menials. 


31. ...-Sani. Danger from fire, diseases, loss of wealth through menials, imprisonment. 


32. ...-Budh. Devotion towards the preceptor and increase of wealth through his 
beneficence, good qualities and well cultured. 


33. ...-Ketu. Antagonism with wife and children, going away from home, loss of wealth 
through rashness. 


34. ...-Sukr. Acquisition of Chatr, Chamar, conveyances etc., success in all ventures, 
worship of Lord Shiva, construction of a house. 


35. ...-Strya. Affliction with piles, wrath of the king, loss of cattle. 


36. ...-Candr. Development of mental powers and intelligence, popularity, visits of 
preceptors, danger of committing sins. 


37. ...-Mangal. Dangers from menials and fire, loss of position, disaster, filthiness and 
meanness. 


38. Guru-Guru. Happiness, increase in wealth, performance of Havan, worship of Lord 
Shiva, acquisition of Chatr and conveyances. 


39. ...-Sani. Failure in fasting, unhappiness, going away to foreign lands, loss of wealth, 
antagonism with kinsmen. 


40. ...-Budh. Progress in education, increase in intelligence, happiness to wife and 
children, popularity, gain of wealth. 


41. ...-Ketu. Opulence and glory, learnedness, gain of knowledge of Shastras, worship 
of Lord Shiva, performance of Havan, devotion towards preceptor. 


42. ...-Sukr. Freedom from diseases, enjoyments, increase in wealth, happiness from 
wife and children. 


43. ...-Strya. Disorders of wind, bile and phlegm, pains, due to disorders of juices in the 
body. 


44. ...-Candr. Acquisition of Chatr with royal symbol, opulence and glory, increase in 
children, eye and stomach troubles. 


45. ...-Mangal. Danger of administration of poison by wife, imprisonment, foreign 
journeys, confusion of mind. 


46. ...-Rahu. Distress from diseases, troubles from thieves, danger from snakes, 
scorpions etc. 


47. Sani-Sani: Loss of luster, due to fevers, leprosy, stomach troubles, danger of death 
from fire. 


48. ...-Budh. Gain of wealth and grains, profits in business, reverence, devotion towards 
deities and Brahmins. 


49. ...-Ketu. Death-like distress, creation of turbulence by evil spirits, insult from a 
woman, other than one’s wife. 


50. ...-Sukr. Enjoyments through wealth, son and beneficence of the king, performance 
of Havanas, marriage etc. 


51. ...-Strya. Troubles in the eyes and forehead, danger from snakes and enemies, loss 
of wealth, distress. 


52. ...-Candr. Sound health, birth of a son, relief, thriving strength, devotion towards 
deities and Brahmins. 


53. ...-Mangal. Affliction with Gulma, danger from enemy, danger of death during 
hunting, danger from snakes, from fire and from poison. 


54. ...-Rahu. Going away from the homeland, danger from the king, bewitchment, 
taking of poison, troubles from wind and bile. 


55. ...-Guru. Attainment of the position of a Commander in the Army, gain of land, 
association with ascetics, reverence from the king. 


56. Budh-Budh. Increase in enjoyments, wealth and religious-mindedness, even- 
mindedness in all living beings. 


57. ...-Ketu. Danger from thieves, from fire and from poison, death-like suffering. 


58. ...-Sukr. Supremacy over others, increase in wealth, reputation and religious- 
mindedness, devotion to Lord Shiva, happiness from son. 


59. ...-Surya. Agony, fevers, lunacy, affectionate relations with wife and kinsmen, 
receipt of stolen property. 


60. ...-Candr. Happiness from wife, birth of a daughter, gain of wealth and enjoyments 
all-round. 


61. ...-Mangal. Tendency to indulge in nefarious activities, pain in eyes, teeth and 
stomach, piles, danger from death. 


62. ...-Rahu. Gain of clothes, ornaments and wealth, separation from one’s own people, 
antagonism with Brahmins, delirium. 


63. ...-Guru. Sublimately, progress in education, increase in wealth and good qualities, 
profits in business. 


64. ...-Sani. Danger of death from thieves, poverty, beggary. 


65. Ketu-Ketu. Danger of fall from a conveyance, quarrels with the enemy, committing a 
murder inadvertently. 


66. ...-Sukr. Gain of land and conveyance, happiness, destruction of enemy, increase in 
cattle wealth. 


67. ...-Surya. Danger from fire and enemy, loss of wealth, mental agony, death-like 
suffering. 


68. ...-Candr. Devotion towards deities and Brahmin, journeys to distant places, gain of 
wealth and happiness, eye and ear troubles. 


69. ...-Mangal. Bilious troubles, enlargement of veins, delirium, antagonism with 
kinsmen. 


70. ...-Rahu. Antagonism with son and wife, going away from home, loss in ventures, 
due to rashness. 


71. ...-Guru. Injuries from weapons, wounds, heart disease, separation from wife and 
children. 
72. ...-Sani. Confusion of mind, tendencies towards nefarious deeds, imprisonment on 


account of addictions (in drugs etc.), distress. 


73. ...-Budh. Enjoyments of bed, perfumery, ornaments and sandal, good food and 
availability of all kinds of comforts. 


74. Sukr-Sukr. Learning, devotion to deities, satisfaction, gain of wealth, increase in the 
number of children. 


75. ...-Stirya. Good reputation in public, loss of happiness in respect of children, heat 
troubles. 


76. ...-Candr. Devotion towards deities, competence, relief by the application of 
Mantras, increase in wealth and fortune. 


77. ...-Mangal. Fevers, wounds, ringworms, itches, devotion towards deities and 
Brahmins. 


78. ...-Rahu. Distress from an enemy, eye and stomach troubles, antagonism with 


friends. 


79. ...-Guru. Good longevity, sound health, happiness from wealth, wife and children, 
acquisition of Chatr and conveyances. 


80. ...-Sani. Danger from the king, loss of happiness, critical disease, controversy with 
menials. 


81. ...-Budh. Satisfaction, reverence from the king, gains of land and wealth from many 
directions, increase in enthusiasm. 


82. ...-Ketu. Loss of life, wealth and reputation, only some money is left for charities 
and sustenance. 


Ch. 64. Effects of Antar Dashas in the Kala Chakr 


1. Maharishi Parashar said. Now I am going to describe to you the effects of Antar 
Dashas in the Kala Chakr Dasha, as related by Lord Shiva to the Goddess Parvati. 


2. Dasha of Mesh Ans. There will be wounds and fever in the Antar Dasha of Mangal in 
the Dasha of Mesh Ans. In the same Dasha and Antar Dasha of the Rasis, owned by 
Budh, Sukr, Candr and Guru, all kinds of happiness will be enjoyed. Danger from an 
enemy will be experienced in the Antar Dasha of Surya. 


3-5. Dasha of Vrishabh Ans. Effects, like quarrels and diseases, will be experienced in 
Antar Dasha of Sani. There will be gains of education and physical felicity in the Antar 
Dasha of Guru, going away from home, death, or distress from fevers in the Antar Dasha 
of Mangal and gains of garments, happy association with women in the Antar Dashas of 
the Rasis, owned by Sukr and Budh. Danger from the king and violent animals may be 
expected in the Antar Dasha of Rasi, owned by Surya. 


6-10. Dasha of Mithun Ans. The effects in the Antar Dashas of the Rasis concerned will 
be, as follows. Sukr - gain of wealth and garments. Mangal - death of parents, danger, 
fever, wounds and travels to distant places. Guru - increase in intelligence, success in 
education, opulence and glory, popularity and affection towards others. Sani - foreign 
journeys, diseases, fear of death, loss of wealth and kinsmen. Budh - success in 
education, gains of garments etc., happiness from wife and children and reverence from 
all quarters. 


11-16. Dasha of Kark Ans. The effects in the various Antar Dashas of the Rasis 
concerned will be, as follows. Candr - happiness from wife and children, gain of wealth 
and reverence from the public. Surya - danger from enemies, animals and the royal 


family, mental agony and fear of diseases. Budh and Sukr - happiness from wife, 
children and friends, increase in wealth, popularity and name and fame. Mangal - danger 
from poison, weapons and diseases, like fever. Guru - gains of wealth, physical felicity, 
honours from the king. Sani - rheumatism, danger from snakes and scorpions and 
distress of all kinds. 


17-21. Dasha of Simh Ans. ... Mangal - diseases of the mouth, bilious fever and danger 
from weapon. Budh and Sukr - gain of clothes, happiness from wife and children. Candr 
- danger from fall from some height, meagre gains of wealth, foreign journeys. Surya - 
danger from enemies, fevers, loss of wisdom, fear of death. Guru - gains of wealth and 
grains, beneficence of the king and Brahmins, progress in education. 


22-26. Dasha of Kanya Ans. ... Sani - many kinds of troubles, travels to distant places, 
fevers, distress from hunger. Guru - gains of wealth through the beneficence of the king, 
arrival of friends and kinsmen and success in education. Mangal - bilious fever, travels 
to distant places, 


danger from fire and from weapons. Budh, Sukr and Candr - gains of wealth through 
sons and employees, many enjoyments. Surya - travel to distant lands, danger from 
diseases, quarrels with kinsmen, danger of assaults by weapons. 


27-31. Dasha of Tula Ans. ... Sukr - wisdom, comforts, happiness from wife and 
children and from wealth, garments etc. Mangal - distress to father, enmity with friends, 
danger from disease of forehead, fevers, poison, weapons etc. Guru - gain of wealth, 
acquisition of a kingdom, performance of religious rites, honours from the king and 
happiness all-round. Sani - travels to distant places, critical diseases, loss in the 
agricultural sphere, danger from enemies. Budh - birth of a son, gain of wealth, 
happiness from one’s wife, joy, dawn of fortune. 


32-33. Dasha of Vrischik Ans. The following effects will be experienced in the Antar 
Dashas of the Rasis concerned. Candr, Budh and Sukr - gain of wealth and grains in 
different ways, freedom from diseases, enjoyments of many kinds. Strya - danger from 
enemies, loss of wealth, distress to father, danger from wild and violent animals. Mangal 
- troubles from wind and bile, wounds, danger from fire and from weapons. Guru - gains 
of wealth, grains,. and gems, devotion towards deities and Brahmins, beneficence of the 
king. Sani - loss of wealth, separation from kinsmen, mental anxiety, danger from 
enemies, diseases. 


34-40. Dasha of Dhanu Ans. The following effects will be derived in the various Antar 
Dashas of the Rasis, owned by... Mangal - heart burn, fevers, cold, diseases of the 
mouth, many kinds of troubles. Sukr, Budh and Candr - increase in wealth and property 
and fortune, progress in education, destruction of enemies, happiness from the king. 


Surya - loss of wife and wealth, quarrels, danger from the king, travels to distant lands. 
Guru - charity, self-mortifications, honours from the king, increase in religious- 
mindedness, happiness from wife, gain of wealth. 


41-44. Dasha of Makar Ans. The following effects will be experienced in the various 
Antar Dashas of the Rasis, owned by... Sani - wrath of Brahmins, deities and the king, 
loss of kinsmen, abandonment of the homeland. Sukr, Budh, Candr and Guru - devotion 
towards deities, self-mortification, honours from the government. Mangal - disease of 
the forehead, assaults on hands and feet, danger from dysentery, blood pollution and 
bilious troubles. Sani - loss of father and kinsmen, fevers, danger from the king and the 
enemies. 


45-49. Dasha of Kumbh Ans. ... Sukr - many kinds of educational attainments, gains of 
property, happiness from wife and children, sound health and increase in wealth. Mangal 
- fevers, danger from fire and from enemies, distress from enemies and mental agony. 
Sani - danger of troubles from wind, bile and phlegm, quarrels, foreign journey, danger 
of suffering from tuberculosis. Guru - freedom from ill health, happiness, honours from 
the king and joy. Budh - happiness from wife, children and wealth, joy, increase in good 
fortune. 


50-55. Dasha of Meen Ans. ... Candr - increase in wisdom and educational attainments, 
happiness from wife, freedom from disease, association with friends, joy and happiness. 
Surya - quarrels with kinsmen, danger from thieves, mental agony, loss of position. 
Budh and Sukr - victory in war, birth of a son, gains of land and cattle, increase in 
wealth. Mangal - bilious troubles, dissension with members of the family, danger from 
enemies. Guru - gain of wealth and grains, happiness from wife, honours from the king, 
name and fame. Sani - loss of wealth, mental agony, abandonment of the homeland on 
account of associations with prostitutes. 


56-58. Maharishi Parashar said to Maitreya. O Brahmin! The effects of Antar Dashas in 
the Kala Chakr, which have been described above, are based on Savya Chakr. The 
effects of Antar Dashas in the Dashas of the Rasis in the Apsavya Chakr have to be 
assessed, after taking into account the benefic and malefic natures of the Lords of the 
Rasis. People have to enjoy the good, or suffer the bad results, according to their good, 
or bad actions in the previous births. Everybody suffers, or enjoys accordingly. The 
peculiarity in this respect is, that inauspicious results have been ascribed to malefics. 
But, if during the Antar Dasha the Grah concerned is a friend of the Lord of the Dasha, 
the results of the Antar Dasha will be favourable. If the Grah concerned is a benefic, but 
an enemy of the Lord of the Dasha, his Antar Dasha effects will not prove favourable. 
This is how the Antar Dasha effects have to be analyzed and conclusions arrived at. 


Ch. 65. Effects of Dashas of Rasis in the AnSas of the Various Rasis 


1-3. The following will be the effects in the Dashas of Rasis in Mesh Ans. Mesh - 
distress from diseases, caused by blood pollution, Vrishabh - increase in grain 
production, Mithun - dawn of knowledge (Gyanodaya), Kark - increase in wealth, Simh 
- danger from enemies, Kanya - happiness from wife, Tula - ministership, Vrischik - 
danger of death, Dhanu - gains of wealth. 


4-5'4. ... Vrishabh Ans. Makar - tendency to indulge in sinful actions, Kumbh - profits 
in business, Meen - success in all ventures, Vrischik - danger from fire, Tula - honours 
from the king, Kanya - danger from enemies, Kark - distress to wife, Simh - eye 
troubles, Mithun - danger from poison. 


6-8. ... Mithun Ans. Vrishabh - gains of wealth, Mesh - fever, Meen - affectionate 
relations with maternal uncle, Kumbh - increase in enemies, Makar - danger from 
thieves, Dhanu - progress in education, Mesh - assaults from enemies, Vrishabh - 
quarrels, Mithun - happiness. 


9-10’4. ... Kark Ans. Kark - enjoyments, Simh - danger from the king, Kanya - 
happiness from kinsmen, Tula - good reputation, Vrischik - distress from father, Dhanu - 
gain of knowledge and wealth, Makar - disgrace in public, Kumbh - loss in business, 
Meen - travels to distant lands. 


11-13. ... in Simh Ans. Vrischik - quarrels, distress, Tula - gain of wealth, happiness, 
Kanya - increase in wealth and grains, Kark - danger from animals, Simh - both 
happiness and sorrows, Mithun - increase in enemies, Vrishabh - gain of property, 
happiness, Mesh - distress, Meen - long journey. 


14-15'4. ... Kanya Ans. Kumbh - gain of wealth, Makar - increase in wealth, Dhanu - 
happiness from brothers, Mesh - happiness from mother, Vrishabh - happiness from 
sons, Mithun - danger from enemies, Kark - affectionate relation with wife, Simh - 
increase in ill health, Kanya - birth of a son. 


16-18. ... Tula Ans. Tula - gain of wealth, Vrischik - happiness from brothers, Dhanu - 
happiness from brothers and uncles, Makar - distress to mother, Kumbh - profits in 
business, Meen - gain of property, happiness, Vrischik - distress to wife, Tula - danger 
from water, Kanya - increase in property and happiness. 


19-20'4. ... Vrischik Ans. Kark - loss of wealth, Simh - danger from government, 
Mithun - gain of lands, Vrishabh - increase in wealth, Mesh - distress on account of 
blood pollution, Meen - happiness, Kumbh - profits in business, Makar - loss of wealth, 
Dhanu - gain of property, happiness. 


21-23. ... Dhanu Ans. Mesh - gain of wealth, Vrishabh - gain of lands, Mithun - success 
in all ventures, Kark - gain of property, happiness, Simh - all comforts, Kanya - quarrels, 
Tula - profits in business, Vrischik - danger from diseases, Dhanu - happiness to sons. 


24-25%. ... Makar Ans. Makar - birth of a son, Kumbh - increase in wealth, Meen - 
well-being, Vrischik - danger from animals, Tula - gain of wealth, Kanya - danger from 
enemies, Kark - gain of wealth, Simh - danger from enemies, Mithun - danger from 
poison. 


26-28. ... Kumbh Ans. Vrishabh - increase in wealth, Mesh - eye troubles, Meen - 
travels to distant lands, Kumbh - increase in wealth, Makar - success in all ventures, 
Dhanu - increase in knowledge and learning, Mesh - loss of happiness, Vrishabh - 
danger of death, Mithun - gains of property, happiness. 


29-31. ... Meen Ans. Kark - increase in wealth, Simh - assistance from the king, Kanya - 
increase in wealth and grains, Tula - profits in business, Vrischik - distress from fever, 
Dhanu - increase in knowledge and wealth, Makar - antagonism with wife, Kumbh - 
danger from water, Meen - all kinds of enjoyments. 


32. There is no doubt, that observance of remedial measures in the form of prescribed 
Maharishi Yagyas destroys the evil effects of the inauspicious Dashas and yield 
happiness. 


Ch. 66. AshtakaVarg 


1-4. Maitreya said: “O Venerable Sage! You have described many kinds of effects, 
relating to the Grahas and Bhavas, after incorporating the views of many sages and 
Acharyas, but it is not possible to say with certainty, if a particular effect is quite correct, 
after considering the contradictions in the effects by the movements of the various 
Grahas. As because of sinful deeds, committed by people in Kaliyuga, their minds have 
become blunt, be kind enough to describe a method, which would enable even the 
shallow minded persons to ascertain their happiness and sorrows and determine their 
longevity on the basis of the positions of the Grahas in transit.” 


5-6. The sage replied: “O Brahmin! You have put a very intelligent question. I will now 
describe the Shastra for the benefit of all, the Shastra, in which there will be no 
contradictions in judging the effects of happiness and sorrows and for determination of 
the longevity. You now listen to me carefully. 


7-11. If the 12 Bhavas, including Lagn, are occupied by, or aspected by benefic Grahas, 
they yield auspicious results, according to their characteristics, but this happens, where 
the Grahas concerned are in their exaltation Rasi, own RAsi, or posited in a benefic 


Bhava. There will be no good effects, if such Grahas are in depression, or posited in an 
inauspicious Bhava. Similarly the Bhavas, associated with, or aspected by malefics in 
depression, or posited in malefic Bhavas, yield adverse results, according to their 
characteristics. If such Grahas be in their exaltation Rasi, the effects will not be adverse. 
This is how the general effects have been described by the Daivajnas. I have only 
repeated those effects. The main purposes of this 


Jyotish Shastra are to determine the longevity and joys and sorrows of the people, but 
because the movements of the Grahas are so subtle, even sages, like Vashista and 
Brihaspati, have not been able to be quite definite in this respect. Then how can a 
common man, particularly in Kaliyuga, do so. 


12. There are two divisions, or parts of the Jyotish Shastra, namely general and 
particular. I have already dealt with the general part. I now come to the other part, which 
deals with this subject in particular. 


13-15. As the effects of the twelve Bhavas are judged from Lagn and Candr, effects of 
the twelve Bhavas and the various Grahas are judged in the same manner. Therefore the 
inauspicious places from the seven Grahas, named, as Karan, beginning from Surya and 
Lagn (total 8), should be marked by dots (Bindus) and auspicious places, named, as 
Sthan, by small vertical lines (Rekhas) and on the basis of their assessment should the 
judgment of the horoscope and predictions be made.” 


Notes. The above arrangement is known, as AshtakaVarg. The meaning of AshtakaVarg 
is literally the group of eight things. In other words it is the combination of the good and 
bad positions of a Grah with reference to the seven Grahas and Lagn. So it is the 
combination of the benefic and malefic marks (the Rekhas and the Bindus) in a planet’s 
chart with reference to the position of the eight Grahas (here Lagn is to be treated, as a 
Grah). 


16. Five Grahas in Ist, 2nd, 8th, 3rd and the 12th Bhavas from Surya are Karanprad (dot 
significators). Similarly four Grahas in the 7th and 4th, three Grahas in the 6th and 9th, 
six Grahas in the 5th, 2 Grahas in the 10th and one Grah in the 11th are dot significators. 


17-19. Thus Lagn, Candr, Guru, Sukr and Budh in the Ist, 2nd and 8th from Surya; 
Sirya, Mangal, Sani, Candr and Guru in the 12th; Budh, Candr, Sukr, Guru in the 4th; 
Lagn, Candr, Sukr in the 9th; Siirya, Sani and Mangal in the 6th; Lagn, Budh, Guru and 
Candr in the 7th; Sukr in the 11th; Sirya, Sani, Sukr, Guru and Mangal in the 3rd; Guru 
and Sukr in the 10th; Sirya, Sani, Candr, Lagn Mangal and Sukr in the Sth are 
Karanprad, or dot indicators. 


20-22. In Candr’s AshtakaVarg 6 Grahas in the 9th and the 2nd, 5 Grahas in the 4th, 8th 


and the Ist, one Grah in the 10th and the 3rd, 4 Grahas in the Sth, 3 Grahas in the 6th 
and the 7th and Ist, eight in the 12th are Karanprad. Thus Lagn, Siirya, Mangal, Sani 
and Sukr, these five in the Ist; Lagn, Budh, Surya, Candr, Sani and Sukr, these 6 in the 
2nd; Guru in the 3rd; Surya, Sani, Candr, Lagn and Mangal, these 5 in the 4th; Sukr, 
Budh, Guru, these 3 in the 6th; Mangal, Lagn and Sani, these 3 in the 7th; Mangal, 
Lagn, Sani, Sukr and Candr, these five in the 8th; Lagn, Stirya, Mangal, Sani, Budh and 
Guru, these 6 in the 9th; Sani only in the 10th; none in the 11th; all the eight in the 12th 
from their own places are Karanprad. These Grahas in the other Bhavas are Rekhaprad 
(line significators). 


23-27. In the AshtakaVarg of Mangal 6 Grahas in the 12th, 4th and 7th, 5 Grahas in the 
5th, 6 Grahas in the 2nd, 7 Grahas in the 9th, 5 Grahas in the Ist and 8th, 4 Grahas in the 
3rd, 3 Grahas in the 10th and 2 Grahas in the 6th are Karanprad. In the 11th no Grah is 
Karanprad. In other words all the Grahas in the 11th from their own places are 
Rekhaprad. Thus Siirya, Candr, Budh, Guru and Sukr, these five in the Ist; Lagn, Siirya, 
Candr, Budh, Guru and Sani, these 6 in the 2nd; Sukr, Mangal, Guru and Sani, these 4 in 
the 3rd; Siirya, Candr, Budh, Guru, Sukr and Lagn, these 6 in the 4th; Candr, Mangal, 
Guru, Sukr and Lagn, these 5 in the 5th; Mangal and Sani, these 2 in the 6th; Budh, 
Candr, Sirya, Sukr, Guru and Lagn, these 6 in the 7th; 


Budh, Candr, Strya, Lagn and Guru, these five in the 8th; Surya, Candr, Mangal, Budh, 
Guru, Sukr and Lagn, these 7 in the 9th; Sukr, Candr and Budh, these 3 in the 10th; none 
in the 11th; Surya, Sani, Budh, Candr, Lagn and Mangal, these 6 in the 12th from their 
own places are Karanprad. 


28-30. In the AshtakaVarg of Budh 3 Grahas in the Ist, 2nd, 4th, 10th, 6th and 9th, 2 
Grahas in the 8th, 6 Grahas in the 3rd and the 7th, none in the 11th, 5 Grahas in the 5th 
and 12th are Karanprad. Thus Strya, Candr and Guru, these 3 in the Ist; Guru, Strya 
and Budh, these 3 in the 2nd; Lagn, Surya, Mangal, Sani, Candr and Guru, these 6 in the 
3rd; Budh, Stirya and Guru, these 3 in the 4th; Guru, Mangal, Candr, Sani and Lagn, 
these 5 in the 5th; Sukr, Sani and Mangal, these 3 in the 6th; Budh, Candr, Lagn, Strya, 
Sukr and Guru, these 6 in the 7th; Budh and Surya, these 2 in the 8th; Guru, Candr and 
Lagn, these 3 in the 9th; Sirya, Guru and Sukr, these 3 in the 10th; none in the 11th; 
Lagn, Candr, Mangal, Sani and Sukr these 5 in the 12th from their own places are 
Karanprad. 


31-34. In the AshtakaVarg of Guru one Grah in the 2nd and 11th, 2 Grahas in the 10th, 7 
Grahas in the 12th, 4 Grahas in the 6th, 5 Grahas in the 8th and 3rd, 3 Grahas in the 
remaining Bhavas are Karanprad. Thus Sukr, Candr and Sani, these 3 in the Ist; Sani in 
the 2nd and 11th; Lagn, Mangal, Candr, Budh and Sukr, these 5 in the 3rd; Surya, Guru 
and Mangal, these 3 in the 5th; Sukr, Sani and Candr, these 3 in the 4th; Budh, Sukr and 
Sani, these 3 in the 7th; Guru, Mangal, Stirya and Candr, these 4 in the 6th; all except 


Sani, these 7 in the 12th; Candr and Sani, these 2 in the 10th; Sani, Mangal and Guru, 
these 3 in the 9th; Lagn, Sani, Sukr, Candr and Budh, these 5 in the 8th from their own 
places are Karanprad. 


35-38. In the AshtakaVarg of Sukr 2 Grahas in the 5th, 8th and 3rd, 5 Grahas in the Ist, 
2nd, 12th, 10th, 8 Grahas in the 7th, 6 Grahas in the 6th, one in the 9th, 3 in the 4th, 
none in the 11th are Karanpradas. Thus Siirya, Mangal, Budh, Guru and Sani, these 5 in 
the Ist and the 2nd; all the 8 Grahas in the 7th; Guru and Surya, these 2 in the 3rd; Surya 
and Mangal, these 2 in the 5th; Sirya in 9th; Sirya, Budh and Guru, these 3 in the 4th; 
Mangal and Budh, these 2 in the 8th; Sukr, Surya, Candr, Sani, Lagn and Guru, these 6 
in the 6th; none in the 11th; Lagn, Sani, Budh, Sukr and Guru, these 5 in the 12th; Lagn, 
Mangal, Budh, Candr, Siirya, these 5 in the 10th from their own places are Karanpradas. 


39-42. In the AshtakaVarg of Sani 7 Grahas in the 2nd, 7th, 9th, 6 Grahas in the 8th, 
Lagn and 4th, 4 Grahas in the 10th, 3rd and 12th, one Grah in the 6th, 5 Grahas in the 
5th, none in the 11th are Karanpradas. Thus Candr, Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr and Sani, 
these 6 in the 4th and the Ist; Candr, Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr, Sani and Lagn, these 7 
in the 2nd and the 7th; Strrya, Candr, Mangal, Guru, Sukr, Sani and Lagn, these 7 in the 
9th; Candr, Guru, Sukr and Sani, these 4 in the 10th; Guru, Siirya, Budh and Sukr, these 
4 in the 3rd; Surya in the 6th; Lagn, Candr, Sani, Surya, these 4 in the 12th; Sukr, Surya, 
Candr, Budh and Lagn, these 5 in the 5th; Candr, Mangal, Guru, Sukr, Sani and Lagn, 
these 6 in the 8th; none in the 11th from their own places are Karanpradas. The 
remaining places are Rekhapradas and are auspicious. 


43-45. The sage said. Now I will describe the auspicious Bhavas for the benefit of the 
Acharyas. In the AshtakaVarg of Siirya: Sani, Mangal and Sirya in the 2nd, 8th and Ist; 
Guru and Budh in the 5th; Budh, Candr and Lagn in the 3rd; Lagn, Siirya, Sani and 
Mangal in the 4th; Lagn, Siirya, Sani, Mangal, Budh and Candr in the 10th; Sirya, 
Candr, Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sani and Lagn in the 11th; Lagn, Sukr and Budh in the 
12th; Lagn, Sukr, Budh, Guru and Candr in the 6th; Sirya, Mangal, Sani and Sukr in the 
7th; Stirya, Mangal, Sani, Budh and Guru in the 9th from their own places are 
Rekhapradas. 


46-48. In the AshtakaVarg of Candr: Budh, Candr and Guru in the Ist; Guru and Mangal 
in the 2nd; Budh, Surya, Candr, Mangal, Sani, Sukr and Lagn in the 3rd; Guru, Sukr and 
Budh in the 4th; Mangal, Budh, Sukr and Sani in the 5th; Sirya, Candr, Mangal, Sani 
and Lagn in the 6th; Surya, Candr, Guru, Budh and Siikt in the 7th; Surya, Budh and 
Guru in the 8th; Sukr and Candr in the 9th; Surya, Budh, Guru, Sukr, Candr, Lagn and 
Mangal in the 10th and all the 8 Grahas in the 11th from their own places are 
Rekhapradas. No Grah is Rekhaprad in the 12th. 


49-50. In the AshtakaVarg of Mangal: Lagn, Sani and Mangal in the Ist; Mangal in the 


2nd; Lagn, Budh, Candr and Sirya in the 3rd; Sani and Mangal in the 4th; Budh and 
Surya in the 5th; Budh, Candr, Guru, Strya, Lagn and Sukr in the 6th; Sani and Mangal 
in the 7th; Sani, Mangal and Sukr in the 8th; Sani in the 9th; Mangal, Strya, Guru, Sani 
and Lagn in 10th; all in the 11th and Guru and Sukr in the 12th from their own places 
are Rekhapradas. 


51-52. In the AshtakaVarg of Budh: Lagn, Sani, Mangal, Sukr and Budh in the Ist; 
Lagn, Mangal, Candr, Sukr and Sani in the 2nd; Sukr and Budh in the 3rd; Lagn, Candr, 
Sani, Sukr and Mangal in the 4th; Budh, Sani and Sukr in the 5th; Guru, Budh, Surya, 
Candr and Lagn in the 6th; Mangal and Sani in the 7th; Mangal, Sani, Lagn, Candr, Sukr 
and Guru in the 8th; Sani, Mangal, Stirya, Budh and Sukr in the 9th; Lagn, Sani, 

Mangal, Budh and Candr in the 10th; all in the 11th and Guru, Budh and Sirya in the 
12th from their own places are Rekhapradas. 


53-55. In the AshtakaVarg of Guru: Lagn, Mangal, Stirya and Budh in the Ist and 4th; 
Guru, Lagn, Mangal, Siirya, Budh, Candr and Sukr in the 2nd; Sani, Guru and Sirya in 
the 3rd; Sukr, Candr, Lagn, Budh and Sani in the 5th; Sukr, Lagn, Budh and Sani in the 
6th; Lagn, Mangal, Guru, Surya and Candr in the 7th; Guru, Sirya and Mangal in the 
8th; Sukr, Stirya, Lagn, Candr and Budh in the 9th; Guru, Budh, Mangal, Sirya, Sukr 
and Lagn in the 10th; all except Sani in the 11th and Sani in the 12th from their own 
places are Rekhapradas. 


56-58. In the AshtakaVarg of Sukr: Lagn, Sukr and Candr in the Ist; Lagn, Sukr and 
Candr in the 2nd; Lagn, Sukr, Candr, Budh, Sani and Mangal in the 3rd; Lagn, Sukr, 
Candr, Sani and Mangal in the 4th; Lagn, Budh, Candr, Guru, Sani and Sukr in the 5th; 
Budh and Mangal in the 6th; none in the 7th; Sukr, Surya, Candr, Guru, Lagn and Sani 
in the 8th; all except Surya in the 9th; Sukr, Guru and Sani in the 10th; all in the 11th; 
Mangal, Candr and Sirya in the 12th from their own places are Rekhapradas. 


59-60. In the AshtakaVarg of Sani: Siirya and Lagn in the Ist; Siirya in the 2nd; Lagn, 
Candr, Mangal and Sani in the 3rd; Lagn and Sirya in the 4th; Guru, Sani and Mangal in 
the 5th; all except Sirya in the 6th; Strya in the 7th; Strya and Budh in the 8th; Budh in 
the 9th; Siirya, Mangal, Lagn and Budh in the 10th; all in the 11th; Mangal, Budh, Guru 
and Sukr in the 12th from their own places are Rekhapradas. 


61-64. In the AshtakaVarg of Lagn 3 Grahas in the Ist and 4th, 2 Grahas in the 3rd, 5 
Grahas in the 2nd, 6 Grahas in the Sth, 8th, 9th and 12th, one Grah in the 10th, 11th and 
6th and all except Guru in the 7th are Karanpradas. Thus Lagn, Surya and Candr in the 
Ist; Lagn, Mangal, Candr, Sirya and Sani in the 2nd; Guru and Budh in the 3rd; Lagn, 
Candr, Mangal, Budh, Sani and Surya in the 5th; Lagn, Candr and Mangal in the 4th; 
Sukr in the 6th; all except Guru in the 7th; Lagn, Strya, Candr, Mangal, Guru and Sani 
in the 8th; Lagn, Stirya, Candr, Mangal, Budh and Sani in the 9th; Sukr in the 10th and 


11th; Lagn, Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr and Sani in the 12th from their own places are 
Karanpradas. 


65-68. In the AshtakaVarg of Lagn: Sani, Budh, Sukr, Guru and Mangal in the Ist; Budh, 
Guru and Sukr in the 2nd; Lagn, Siirya, Candr, Mangal, Sukr and Sani in 3rd; Siirya, 
Budh, Guru, Sukr and Sani in the 4th; Guru and Sukr in the 5th; all except Sukr in the 
6th; Guru in the 7th; Budh and Sukr in the 8th; Guru and Sukr in the 9th; all except Sukr 
in the 10th; all except Sukr in the 11th and Sirya and Candr in the 12th from their own 
places are Rekhapradas. 


69. In the charts of AshtakaVarg Karan is signified by a Bindu, or dot (0) and Sthan by a 
Rekhapradas, or line (1). Karan is inauspicious, while Sthan is auspicious. 


70-72. To identify the auspicious and inauspicious Bhavas in the AshtakaVarg a chart 
should be prepared with 14 horizontal lines and ten vertical lines. The form of the chart 
so prepared will consist of 117 apartments. In this chart in the first line incorporates the 
names of the seven Grahas and Lagn. In the first column write the numbers of all the 12 
Bhavas. After this mark dots under the Grah and against the Karanprad Bhavas. By 
doing so the Karanprad Bhavas of all the 8 Grahas, including Lagn, will become known 
clearly and whenever the AshtakaVarg Grah will pass in transit the dot-marked Bhavas, 
he will yield unfavourable results. In his transit to other Bhavas he would give 
favourable effects. The following table shows the dots in the AshtakaVarg of Siirya. 


Ch. 67. Trikon Shodhana in the AshtakaVarg 


1-2. The sage said. O Brahmin! After preparing the AshtakaVarg of all the Grahas, 
including Lagn, Trikon Shodhana has to be done for each Rasi. A Trikon is made of 
three Rasis equidistant from each other. Thus Mesh, Simh and Dhanu, Vrishabh, Kanya 
and Makar, Mithun, Tul and Kumbh, Kark, Vrischik and Meen form the Trikonas of the 
Rasis. 


3-5. The Trikon Shodhana (rectification) should be done by writing the Rekhas in the 
AshtakaVargas of Surya etc. under the Rasis Mesh etc. Amongst the Trikon Rasis the 
Rasi, which has lesser number of Rekhas, should be allotted Rekhas, arrived at by 
deducting its number of Rekhas from the greater number of Rekhas of the three Trikon 
Rasis. No Trikon Shodhana is necessary, if any of the Trikon Rasis has no Rekha. 
Shodhana should be done, if all the three of them have equal number of Rekhas, that is a 
zero should be written against all of them. Thereafter Ekadhipatya Shodhana should be 
done in the same manner, described later. (For Shodhana of the AshtakaVarg of a Grah 
the first thing to be done is to see, in which Rasi the Grah is posited. Beginning from 
that Rasi, the names of the 12 Rasis should be written and then the names of the Grahas, 
posited in them, should be mentioned against them. Thereafter the Rekhas, gained by 


that Rasi, should be written below them and the number, achieved after Shodhana, 
below it) 


Ch. 68. Ekadhipatya Shodhana in the AshtakaVarg 


1-5. Ekadhipatya Shodhana is done after writing the numbers for Rasis, arrived at by 
Trikon Shodhana. Ekadhipatya Shodhana is done, if both the two Rasis, owned by a 
Grah, have gained a number after Trikon Shodhana. Ekadhipatya Shodhana is not to be 
done, if one Rasi has got a number and the other is bereft of any number. The following 
are the rules for Ekadhipatya Shodhana. If both the Rasis are without a Grah and the 
Trikon Shodhana numbers are different, both should be given the smaller number. If 
both the Rasis are with Grahas, no Shodhana is to be done. If amongst the two RAasis one 
is with a Grah and a smaller Trikon rectified number and the other is without Grah with 
a bigger number, deduct the 


smaller number from the bigger number and the number of the Rasi with Grah should be 
kept unchanged. If the Rasi with the Grah has a bigger number than that of the Rasi 
without Grah, the Shodhana should be done of the number of the Rasi without Grah and 
the number of the Rasi with Grah should be kept unchanged. If both the Rasis are 
without Grahas and possess the same numbers, Shodhana of both the numbers should be 
done and the rectified numbers should be reduced to zero. If one Rasi is with Grah and 
the other is without any Grah, the number of the latter should be reduced to zero. Stirya 
and Candr own one Rasi only, their numbers should be kept unchanged. 


6. After doing Ekadhipatya Shodhana, Pinda Sadhana should be taken in hand. 
Ch. 69. Pinda Sadhana in the AshtakaVarg 


1-4. The Sage said. O Brahmin! After completing the Trikon and Ekadhipatya Shodhana 
in the AshtakaVargas of all the Grahas, the rectified number should be multiplied by the 
measure of the Rasi. If there be any Grah in any Rasi, the rectified number should be 
multiplied by the measure of the Grah also. Then, after multiplying the rectified number 
of each Rasi, the products should be added up. The total so arrived at will be Pinda of 
that Grah. The multiples of Rasis are 10 for Vrishabh and Simh, 8 for Mithun and 
Vrischik, 7 for Mesh and Tul, 6 for Makar and Kanya. The multipliers of the remaining 
RAsis are the same, as their numbers. (Rasiman Chakr. Mesh 7, Vris 10, Mith 8, Kark 4, 
Simh 10, Kany 6, Tula 7, Vrsk 8, Dhan 9, Maka 5, Kumb 11, Mina 12) The multipliers 
of Grahas are 10 for Guru, 3 for Mangal, 7 for Sukr, 6 for Budh, Siirya, Candr and Sani. 
(Grahman Chakr. Stirya 5, Candr 5, Mangal 8, Budh 5, Guru 10, Sukr 7, Sani 5) 


Ch. 70. Effects of the Ashtaka Varg 


1-6. The matters to be considered from Strya and other Grahas are, as follows. Surya - 
the soul (Atma), nature, physical strength, joys and sorrows and father. Candr - mind, 
wisdom, joy and mother. Mangal - co-borns, strength, qualities and land. Budh - 
business dealings, livelihood and friends. Guru - nourishment of the body, learning, son 
(children), wealth and property. Sukr - marriage, enjoyments, conveyance, prostitution 
and sexual intercourse with women. Sani - longevity, source of maintenance, grief, 
danger, losses and death. The following procedure should be adopted to ascertain the 
effects of a house. Multiply the number of Rekhas with the Yog Pinda (Rasi Pinda plus 
Grah Pinda), connected with the Ashtaka Varg of that Grah and divide the product by 27. 
The remainder will denote the number of the Nakshatr. During the transit of Sani in that 
Nakshatr the Bhava concerned will be harmed. 


7-9. The 9th house from Surya at the time of birth deals with father. The Rekhas of that 
Rasi, as marked in Strya’s AshtakaVarg, should be multiplied by the Yog Pinda and the 
product be divided by 27. The remainder will denote the number of Nakshatr. The father 
will be in distress, or he will otherwise suffer, when Sani in transit passes through the 
Nakshatr. Even, when Sani passes in transit the Trikon Nakshatras, father, or relatives, 
like father, may die, or suffer. 


Notes. By dividing the 27 Nakshatras in three equal parts, the Ist, 10th and 19th fall in 
Trikon from each other. Surya is PitraKarak (significator of father). Therefore all about 
father is ascertained from the Siirya’s AshtakaVarg. 


10-11. If the AshtakaVarg Rekha number is multiplied by the Yog Pinda and the product 
is divided by 12, the remainder will denote the R4si, through which, or through the Rasis 
in Trikon to it, the transit of Sani will cause harm, or unfavourable effects to father. 
Death of the father may occur, if the Dasa prevailing at that time be unfavourable. If the 
Dasa be favourable, father will face only adverse effects. 


(12-15 Arishta to Father) 12-14. The death of the father may be expected, if Rahu, Sani, 
or Mangal are in the 4th from Siirya at the time of transit of Sani through any of the 
above three Rasis (Trikon Rasis). The death of the father will come to pass by such 
transit, if at that time Sani, associated, or aspected by a malefic, be in the 9th from Lagn, 
or Candr and/or the Dasa of the Lord of the 4th from Lagn be in operation. The death 
does not take place, if a favourable Dasa be in force at the time of Sani’s transit. This 
should be kept in mind by the Jyotishis, while making predictions. 


15. If the Rasi of Lagn of the native be the 8th Rasi from Lagn of the father, or, if the 
Lord of the 8th from father’s Lagn be in Lagn of the native, he takes over all the 


responsibilities of his father after the latter’s death. 


16-18. The father enjoys happiness in the Dasa of the Lord of the 4th from Lagn. The 


native is obedient to his father, if the Lord of the 4th be in Lagn, or the 11th, or in the 
11th, or 10th from Candr. If the birth be in the 3rd Rasi from Lagn, or Candr of the 
father, the native makes proper use of the wealth, inherited from his father. If the birth be 
in the 10th Rasi from Lagn, or Candr of the father, the native will inherit all the good 
qualities of his father. If the Lord of the 10th be in Lagn, the native will be more 
distinguished than his father. 


19-20. No auspicious functions, like marriage etc., should be performed in the month of 
Rasis (that is, when Sirya transits that Rasi), which has more number of dots in Strya’s 
AshtakaVarg. The same applies to the Samvatsar of that Rasi (that is, when the mean 
Guru transits that Rasi). Auspicious functions should be performed, when Sirya, or the 
mean Guru transits the Rasi, which has more Rekhas in Strya’s AshtakaVarg. 


21-23. In the same manner no auspicious functions should be performed during the 
transit of Candr in the Rasi, which has larger number of dots in Candr’s AshtakaVarg. 
Consideration, regarding mother, house and village, should be done from the 4th Bhava 
from Candr. Therefore multiply the number of Rekhas in the AshtakaVarg of Candr by 
the Yog Pinda of that AshtakaVarg and divide the product by 27. The death of, or distress 
to mother may be expected, when Sani passes in transit through the Nakshatr, denoted 
by the remainder. Then divide the product by 12. The death of the mother may occur, 
when Sani transits the Rasi, denoted by the remainder. Distress to mother may be 
predicted, when Sani transits the Nakshatras, or Rasis in Trikon to Nakshatr and Rasi, 
indicated above. 


24-27. Consideration of brothers (co-borns), valour and patience is done from Mangal’s 
AshtakaVarg. If the number of Rekha is larger in any Rasi after Trikon Shodhana, there 
will be gains of land, happiness from wife and great happiness to brother, when Mangal 
passes through that Rasi in transit. If Mangal be weak, the brothers will be short lived. 
There will be distress to brothers, when Mangal transits a Rasi without Rekhas. Here 
also the Yog Pinda of Mangal should be multiplied by the number of Rekhas in the 
AshtakaVarg and the product be divided separately by 27 and 12. The remainders will 
denote the Nakshatr and Rai. The brother will suffer, whenever Sani transits that 
Nakshatr, or Rasi (or the Trikon Nakshatras, or RAsis). 


28-29. Consideration in regard to family, maternal uncle and friends should be done 
from the 4th Bhava from Budh. The family etc. will enjoy happiness during the transit of 
Budh’s AshtakaVarg. After performing Trikon and Ekadhipatya Shodhana in Budh’s 
AshtakaVarg, the happiness, or distress of the family should be predicted from the transit 
of Sani through the resultant Nakshatr and Rasi (and those in Trikon to them). 


30-33. All about knowledge, religious inclinations of the native and son (progeny) is to 
be ascertained from the 5th Bhava from Guru. If the Rekhas in the 5th Bhava from Guru 


are larger in number in the AshtakaVarg, there will be great happiness in respect of 
progeny. If the dots are larger in number, the happiness in respect of progeny will be 
meagre. The number of children are equal to the number of Rekhas in the 5th Bhava 
(from Guru), provided it is not the Rasi of debilitation of Guru, or his enemy’s RAsi. In 
that case the number of children will be very limited. The number of children is also 
equal to the number of Navams, in which the Lord of the 5th from Guru is posited. 
Multiply the Yog Pinda of Guru by the number of Rekhas in the AshtakaVarg and divide 
the product separately by 27 and 12. The remainders will denote the Nakshatr and R4si. 
Transit of Sani through that Nakshatr and its Trikon Nakshatras and of that Rasi and its 
Trikon Rasis will be inauspitious. During that period the knowledge, learning and 
religious activities of the native will also be adversely affected. 


34-36. There will be gain of wealth, land and happiness and marriage, whenever Sukr 
passes in transit through the Rasis, which have larger number of Rekhas in the 
AshtakaVarg of Sukr. These gains will be from the directions of the 7th Rasi from Sukr 
and of its Trikon Rasis. The effects should be judged in the manner, already explained 
earlier, after multiplying the Rekhas in the 7th Bhava from Sukr by the Yog Pinda. 


37-40. The 8th Bhava from Sani signifies death, as well as longevity. Assessment about 
longevity should be made from that Bhava through the AshtakaVarg. Therefore predict 
distress to the native in the year, equal to the number of Rekhas in the AshtakaVarg from 
Lagn up to Sani. The year, equal to the number of Rekhas from Sani up to Lagn, will 
also be of distress. If in the year, equal to the total of the above Rekhas, Arishta Dasa be 
also in operation, there can be possibility of death of the native. 


41-42. Multiply the Yog Pinda by the number of Rekhas in the AshtakaVarg and divide 
the product by 27. The death of the native will take place, when Sani passes in transit 
through the Nakshatr, denoted by the remainder, or its Trikon Nakshatras. Again, divide 
the product by 12. The native will face danger of death, when Sani passes in transit 
through the Rasi, denoted by the remainder, or through its Trikon Rasis. 


43-44. The results will be favourable, when Sani passes in transit through Rasis, which 
have larger number of Rekhas in Sani’s AshtakaVarg. Sani’s transit through Rasis, which 
have larger number of dots, will produce only evil effects. 


Ch. 71. Determination of Longevity through the AshtakaVarg 


1-4. The sage said. I will now describe the method of determining longevity from the 
AshtakaVarg. For this purpose the Ashtaka Vargas of Lagn and all the Grahas have to be 
studied. The Rekhas in all the Rasis have been allotted specific spans of life. The Rasi, 
which has no Rekhas, has been allotted 2 days, that with one Rekha gets 14 days, one 
day for Rasi 


with 2 Rekhas, half day for Rasi with 3 Rekhas, 7’ days for Rasi with 4 Rekhas, 2 years 
for Rasi with 5 Rekhas, 4 years for Rasi with 6 Rekhas, 6 years for Rasi with 7 Rekhas 
and 8 years for Rasi with 8 Rekhas. In this manner the spans of life should be worked 
from Rekhas in all the Ashtaka Vargas. Half of the sum total of all will be the longevity, 
based on AshtakaVarg. 


Ch. 72. Aggregational AshtakaVargas 


1-2. The sage said. O Brahmin! Write down a Rasi Kundali with 12 Bhavas, including 
Lagn. Then insert the total of the Rekhas in all the AshtakaVargas of the Grahas in the 
Rasi concerned. The AshtakaVarg with such Rekhas is called the Samuday AshtakaVarg, 
or the aggregational AshtakaVarg. From this should be judged good and adverse effects 
of the Rasi Kundali. 


3-5. In the aggregational AshtakaVarg the Rasi, which has more than 30 Rekhas, gives 
favourable effects, that, having between 25 and 30 Rekhas, produces medium effects and 
that Rasi, who has less than 25 Rekhas, yields adverse effects. Auspicious functions, like 
marriage etc., should be performed, when the Grah, on whose basis the time and date of 
functions are performed, moves into the Rasi with favourable effects. The Rasi, which is 
productive of adverse effects should be avoided for these purposes. For example, the 
strength of Candr (CandraBal) is generally acceptable for all auspicious functions. 
Therefore auspicious functions should be performed, or started, when Candr is in the 
Rasi with maximum number of Rekhas. The Grah in the Rasi with favourable number of 
Rekhas produces auspicious effects and the Grah in the Rasi with unfavourable number 
of Rekhas yields evil results. 


6-6’. Amongst the 12 Bhavas more than 30 Rekhas advance the effects of a Bhava, 
between 25 and 30 Rekhas produce medium effects and the effects of the Bhava, which 
contains less than 25 Rekhas, get damaged. 


Notes. From the above rules it can be interpreted, that, if there are less than 25 Rekhas in 
6th, 8th and 12th Bhava, their effects become favourable. The effects will become 
adverse, if these Bhavas contain more than 25 Rekhas. 


7-8. If in a Rasi Kundali there are larger number of Rekhas in the 11th than those in 10th 
and there are smaller number of Rekhas in the 12th than those in the 11th and Lagn 
contains largest number of Rekhas, the native will be wealthy and will enjoy all kinds of 
comforts and luxury. 


9-10. Divide the 12 Bhavas in 3 sections. There will be sufferings and distress in that 
part of the life, which is represented by the section of the Rasi Kundali with more 


malefics. There will be happiness etc., in the part of the life, represented by the section 
of the Rasi Kundali, containing more benefics. There will be mixed results in that area 
of life, when the relative section of the Rasi Kundali has equal number of benefics and 
malefics. The Bhavas from Lagn up to the 4th signify childhood, those from 5th to 8th 
youth and those from the 9th to 12th represent old age. 


11-28. There will be danger of death in the month of the Rasi (period of Surya’s transit 
in that Rasi), which has 7, or less than 7 Rekhas in the Samudaya AshtakaVarg. To ward 
off this evil effect 20 Tolas of gold and 2 heaps of sesame seeds, resembling the shape of 
a mountain, should be given in charity. ... possibility of death ..., ... 8. Tuladan of 
camphor is recommended to obtain relief from this evil effect. ... danger of snakes ..., 
... 9. A chariot 


with 7 horses should be given in charity .... ... danger from weapons ..., which contains 
10 .... An armour together with Vajra should be given in charity to ward off .... ... 
danger of disgrace for no cause ..., ... 11. An idol of the moon, made of 10 Tolas of 
gold, should be given in charity .... ... danger of death from drowning ..., ... 12. Land 
full of crops should be given in charity .... ... danger of death from wild and violent 
animals ..., in which there are 13 .... A Shaligram Shila should be given in charity .... 
... danger of death ...,... 14. A Varah Murti, made of gold, should be given in charity 
ere danger of the wrath of the king ..., ... 15. An elephant should be given in charity 
Seca hes danger of Arishta (calamity, disaster, or misfortune) ..., ... 16. A Kalpa Vriksha, 
made of gold, should be given in charity .... ... danger from diseases ..., that has 17 .... 
A cow and jaggery should be given in charity .... ... danger of conflict ..., ... 18. A cow, 
jewels, land and gold should be given in charity .... ... possibility of banishment from 
the homeland ..., which has 19 .... Family deity should be worshipped .... ... loss of 
intelligence ..., ... 20. Goddess Saraswati should be worshipped .... ... distress from 
diseases ..., that has 21 .... A heap of grains, shaped, like a mountain, should be given in 
charity ....... distress to kinsmen ..., ... 22. Gold should be given in charity .... The 
native will be in distress ..., ... 23. An idol of the sun, made of 7 Tolas of gold, should 
be given in charity ....... death of the kinsmen ..., ... 24. 10 cows should be given in 
charity ....... loss of wisdom ..., ... 25. Goddess Saraswati should be worshipped .... 
... loss of wealth ..., ... 26. Gold should be given in charity .... ... loss of wealth ..., ... 
27. Sri Sukta Japa should be performed .... ... losses in several ways ..., ... 28. Havana 
of Stirya should be performed .... ... anxieties all-round ..., ... 29. Ghi, clothes and gold 
should be given in charity .... ... gains of wealth and grains etc. ..., ... 30. 


29. There will be all-round increase in wealth, happiness in respect of children and 
enjoyments in the Samvatsar, month and Nakshatr of the Rasi, which has more than 30 
Rekhas. ... increase in wealth, property, children and good reputation, if the Rasi has 
more than 40 Rekhas. 


30-31. The Rasi, which is auspicious in AshtakaVarg Samudaya, is considered 
auspicious for all auspicious functions. Consequently the auspiciousness of Ashtaka Varg 
should be got checked before performing any function, like marriage etc. If a RAsi is not 
auspicious in AshtakaVarg, then its auspiciousness should be checked from transit 
effects. It is not necessary to check transit effects, if a RASi is auspicious in AshtakaVarg. 
Thus the auspiciousness of the Rasi in the AshtakaVarg should be considered, as 
paramount. 


Ch. 73. Effects of the Rays of the Grahas 


1-2. The sage said. O Brahmin! Now I am going to tell you about the number of rays of 
the Grahas. When Surya etc. are in their deep exaltation point, their rays are: Surya 10, 
Candr 9, Mangal 5, Budh 5, Guru 7, Sukr 8 and Sani 5. The rays are nil, when these 
Grahas are in deep debilitation, the number of rays would be proportionate with the 
number of Rasi. The following method is to be adopted for ascertaining the 
proportionate number of rays. Deduct the debilitation Rasi etc. of the Grah, whose rays 
are to be ascertained, from his longitude. If the remainder is less than 6 RAsis it should 
be multiplied by the number of rays of that Grah, mentioned above and the product 
should be divided by 6. The result will denote the number of rays of that Grah. In case 
after deduction the remainder is more than 6 Rasis, then it should be deducted from 12. 
The other procedure will remain the same. 


3-7. The Sage said. O Maitreya! Other Acharyas have recommended further correction 
of the number of rays, worked out in the manner described above. The corrections have 
to be made, 


as follows. If the Grah be in his exaltation R&si, the number of rays ascertained should 
be trebled. ... Mooltrikon, ... doubled. ... own Rasi, ... multiplied by 3 and the product 
be divided by 2. ... Rasi of his Adhimitr (great friend), ... multiplied by 4 and the 
product be divided by 3. ... Bhava of a friend, ... multiplied by 6 and the product be 
divided by 5. The number of rays ascertained should be halved, if the Grah be in the 
Bhava of his enemy. If he be in the Bhava of his Adhi-Shatru (great enemy), the number 
of rays ascertained should be multiplied by 2 and the product be divided by 5. No 
correction is to be made, if the Grah is in the Bhava of a neutral. The effects should be 
declared after computation of the net number of rays of each Grah. 


8-18. The effects, produced by the number of rays of Grahas, are given below. Between 
1 and 5 poor and unhappy, even if born in an eminent family. Between 6 and 10 poor, 
carrier of loads and without wife and children. 11 meagre wealth and few children. 12 
meagre wealth, idiot and wicked. 13 thief. 14 wealthy, protector and maintainer of 
several families, learned and observer of the traditions of the family. 15 head of the 
family, achieves proficiency in many kinds of learnings, good qualities. This is what 


Lord Brahma has said. 16 most distinguished in the family. 17 employer of many 
servants. 18 maintainer of large family. 19 possessor of name and fame. 20 blessed with 
a large family and kinsmen. 21 maintainer and protector of 50 persons. 22 charitable and 
kind. 23 well cultured and happy. Between 24 and 30 healthy, powerful, favourite of the 
king, splendourous, possessor of a large family. Between 31 and 40 minister and 
maintainer and protector of 100 to 1000 persons. Between 40 and 50 king. 51 and above 
powerful sovereign. 


19. The effects should be predicted, according to the number of rays of the Grahas at the 
time of birth, after taking into account the status of the native. 


20. For example, if the rays are more than 50 in number, one born a Kshatriya king’s 
family will become a powerful sovereign, one born in a Vaishya family will become a 
king (or high dignitary), one born in Sudra family will become wealthy and one born in 
a Brahmin family will become very learned and will observe all religious norms. 


21.The effects of the Grahas, moving from their debilitation to exaltation, are full. The 
effects of the Grahas, moving from their exaltation to debilitation, will be lesser than 
described above. 


22-23. Auspicious and inauspicious effects of all the Grahas are according to the number 
of rays they possess. The prediction will not be correct without the knowledge of the 
effects of the rays. Therefore it is imperative, that in the judgment of Rasi Kundalis and 
declaring results the effects of the number of rays of the Grahas be taken into account. 


Ch. 74. Effects of the Sudarshana Chakr 


1-3. Maharishi Parasara said to Maitreya. O Brahmin! Now I will impart to you the 
knowledge of a great secrecy and superior importance, which was communicated to me 
by Lord Brahma himself for the benefit of the world. This is a Chakr by the name of 
Sudarshana, through which Devajnas will be able to predict the favourable and 
unfavourable results for every year, every month and every day from the time of birth to 
the time of death of a person. Listen to this very intently. 


4. O Brahmin! Take a point and from it draw three circles. Within the circles draw 12 
lines, so as to provide 12 Bhavas within each circle. This is how Sudarshana Chakr is 
drawn. 


5-6. In the first circle (innermost) place the 12 Bhavas from Lagn with Grahas, posited 
there. In the circle next to the innermost circle place the 12 Bhavas from the RAasi of 
Candr with the Grahas in them. In the third circle place the 12 Bhavas from the Rasi of 
Surya with Grahas in them. Thus there will be 3 Rasis in each Bhava of the Chakr. 


7-9. The significant aspect of this Chakr is, that Lagn, Candr and Surya represent the 
first Bhava. The 2nd, 3rd etc. up to 12th from Candr and Siirya will deal with the same 
subject, as they do, when reckoned from Lagn. Then the results should be assessed, 
according to the Grahas in each Bhava. In this form of Rasi Kundali Siirya is considered 
auspicious in the first Bhava and inauspicious, or malefic in other Bhavas. The malefics 
do not produce evil effects, if they are in their exaltation Rasi. In this manner predictions 
should be made, after considering the benefic and malefic natures of the Grahas, their 
disposition and aspects from and on them. 


10. A Bhava gets advancement, if it is occupied, or aspected by the Lord, or a benefic. 
The Bhava, which is occupied, or aspected by a malefic, is harmed. 


11-13. The effects of a Bhava will be in accordance with the Grah occupying it, or in 
accordance with the Grah aspected, if no Grah is in occupation of the Bhava. The effects 
of a Bhava, occupied by a benefic, will be auspicious and the Bhava, occupied by a 
malefic, will be inauspicious. Effects of the aspects will be the same. If a Bhava is 
influenced both by benefics and malefics, the results will depend on the majority 
amongst the benefics and malefics. If the number of benefics is larger than the number 
of malefics, the results will be auspicious. If reverse is the case, inauspicious, or evil 
effects may be expected. If there are equal number of malefics and benefics, those with 
greater strength will influence the results of that Bhava. Mixed results should be 
declared, if there be no difference in the strength of malefics and benefics. The same 
would apply to aspects. 


14. The effects should be declared, according to its Lord, if the Bhava is neither 
occupied, nor aspected by a Grah. 


15-16. A natural benefic loses his benevolence, if he is in more malefic Vargas. Similarly 
a natural malefic loses his malevolence, if he is in more benefic Vargas (SaptaVarg). A 
Grah’s own Rasi, his exaltation Rasi and benefic Vargas are considered auspicious. And 
malefic and the Vargas of an enemy and debilitated Rasi are considered inauspicious. 


17. The sage said, that the results should be declared only after assessing the 
auspiciousness and inauspiciousness of all the Bhavas. 


18. Maitreya asked. O Venerable sage! Kindly enlighten me on one point. If all the 
Bhavas are judged in accordance with the Sudarshana Chakr, why many learned sages 
have advocated declaration of effects from the Bhavas, reckoned from Lagn in Rasi 
Kundali? 


19-20. The sage replied. The results should be declared in accordance with the 


Sudarshana Chakr, only when Strya and Candr being in separate Rasis different from 
the Rasi of Lagn. If amongst Lagn, Surya and Candr, all the three, or two of them are in 
the same RAsi, the judgment of effects should be made from the Rasi Kundali only. 


(21-23) The sage said. O Brahmin! Now I will tell you about the effects, produced every 
year and every month by the twelve Bhavas in their Dasas and Antardasas, according to 
Sudarshana Chakr. Under this system every one of the twelve Bhavas, beginning from 
the Ist, is allotted a Dasa period of one year. Thus every year in 12 years a Bhava 
becomes Lagn of the year and the remaining become 2nd, 3rd and so on. Every year 
every Bhava will have Antardasa of one month. By following the method of Lagn of the 
year here also, there will be a Lagn of the month. The first Antardasa will be of the first 
Bhava and then will follow for 12 months the Antardasas of the other Bhavas, every 
Bhava assuming the role of Lagn by turn. Every Bhava gets Pratyantar Dasa of 2’ days 
and Vidasa of 12’ Ghatikas. The same method is to be adopted for judging the effects of 
Bhavas in Pratyantar Dasas and Vidasas. 


24-26. At the time of commencement of a Dasa, if there be benefic in the Ist, 4th, 7th, 
10th, Sth, 9th and 8th, favourable effects will be experienced in the concerned year, 
month etc. The Bhava, which is occupied by only Rahu, or Ketu, becomes harmful. The 
same will be the fate of the Bhava, which is occupied by a larger number of malefics. If 
there be benefics in Bhavas other than the 12th, or 6th, the Bhava concerned will 
produce favourable effects. In other words, if the benefics be in the 12th, or 6th from the 
Bhava concerned, unfavourable effects will be derived in the related year, month etc. If 
there be malefics in the 3rd, 6th and 11th from the Bhava, assuming the role of Lagn, 
then these three Bhavas will produce auspicious results. The effects can be ascertained 
for every year, month etc. in this manner. The total number of years in Vimsottari Dasa 
are 120 years. After every 12 years the same method of determining the Dasas, 
Antardasas etc. has to be repeated for Lagn and other Bhavas. 


27-28. After ascertaining the effects of the years, months etc. in accordance with the 
Sudarshana Chakr, assessment of effects for the years, months etc. should be made on 
the basis of AshtakaVarg. The benefic, or malefic effects will be full, if the assessment 
from both produces the same results. If they are different, the comparative strength of 
both should be taken into account to declare the final results. 


Ch. 75. Characteristic Features of Panchmahapurushas 


1-2. The sage said. O Maitreya! Now I will relate to you the characteristic features of 
Panchmahapurushas. When Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr and Sani, being in their own, or 
exaltation Rasi, be in Kendra to Lagn, they give rise to Ruchaka, Bhadra, Hamsa, 
Malavya and Sasa Yogas. These Yogas are called Panchmahapurusha Yogas and the 
persons, born in these Yogas, are known Panchmahapurushas. 


3-7. The Ruchaka native possesses a long face, he is very enthusiastic, has spotless 
lustre, is powerful, has attractive brows, black hair and is fond of all things. He loves to 
fight wars, is of dark-red complexion, is victorious over enemies, is discriminating, is 
protector of thieves and has cruel temperament and slender thighs. He is a devotee of 
Brahmins, has marks of Veena, Varg, Dhanus, Pasha and Vrasha RAsis in his hands along 
with Chakr Rekha. He is well versed in occult sciences. He is 100 Anguls in height, his 
waste has the circumference, equal to the length of his face and is 1000 Karshas in 
weight. He, as ruler of Sahyachala and Vindhya Pradesh, dies, after attaining the age of 
70, by fire or weapons. 


Notes. The old Rupee had the weight of 1 Karsha. 4 Karshas are equal to one Pala and 
300 Palas make one Tula, according to Amarkosha. 20 Tulas are equal to one Bhara. 


8-12. The Bhadra native is splendourous, like a lion, has very developed chest (or chest 
with well developed muscles), has the gait of an elephant, has long and thick arms, is 
learned in all respects. He is well versed in Yog performance, is Sattva-Guni and has 
beautiful feet, moustaches and head. He is fond of luxuries and comforts and has marks 
of Sankha (conch), Chakr, Gada, arrow, elephant, Dhwaja (flag) and Hala (plough) in his 
hands and feet. He is well versed in Shastras, has black and curly hair, possesses 
independent nature and is protector of his family. His friends share in the enjoyment of 
his wealth. He is 20 tulas in weight. He lives happily with his wife and children and, as 
ruler of Madhya Desha, lives for one hundred years. 


13-16. The Hamsa native has voice, like a Hamsa, has a handsome appearance and well 
developed nose. He is a king with phlegmatic temperament, honey-like tawny-coloured 
eyes, red-coloured nails, sharp intelligence, sturdy cheeks, round forehead and beautiful 
feet. He has marks of Matsya (fish), Ankush (the iron hook, with which elephants are 
driven), Dhanus (bow), Sankh, Kamal (lotus) in his hands and feet. He is very passionate 
and his lust remains unfulfilled. He is 96 Anguls in height. He is fond of swimming and 
playing games in watery places. He enjoys life fully and, as ruler of a land, situated 
between the Ganges and Yamuna, dies after attaining the age of 100 years. 


17-19. The Malavya native has beautiful lips and a slender waist. He is lustrous, like 
Candr, and has fragrance in his body. He is of ordinary red complexion, has a medium 
stature and clean and beautiful teeth. His voice is like that of an elephant and his arms 
are long enough to reach up to his knees. His face is thirteen Anguls in length and ten 
Anguls in breadth. He lives happily for seventy years, as ruler of Sindhu and Malwa, and 
then leaves for his heavenly abode. 


20-22. The Sasa native has small sized teeth and face, but his body is not small. He is 
valorous. He has a slender waist and beautiful thighs. He is wise and enjoys wandering 


in forests and mountains. He is well versed in the loopholes of the enemy. He is lively, 
virile and fond of women. He usurps other people’s wealth. He has marks of Mala 
(garland), Veena, Mridanga (musical instruments) and weapons in his hands and feet. He 
rules happily over several parts of the earth and then leaves for his heavenly abode at the 
age of 70. 


Ch. 76. Effects of the Elements 


1. The sage said. O Brahmin! Now I will tell you about the effects of the five elements: 
space, air, fire, water and earth. 


2. Space, air, fire, water and earth are ruled by Guru, Sani, Mangal, Sukr and Budh. The 
effects are experienced in proportion to the intensity of the various elements. 


3-4. The native will have temperament, according to the greater strength of the Grah at 
the time of birth. Guru, Sani, Mangal, Sukr and Budh will, respectively, give spacial 
(etheral), airy (windy), fiery, watery and earthy temperament. If all of them, or many of 
these Grahas have equal strength, the temperament will be of a mixed character. 


5. If Strya be endowed with strength, the native will have fiery temperament. If Candr 
be strong, the native will have watery temperament. All the Grahas in course of their 
Dasa endow the native with bodily lustre, relating to their elements. 


6. The characteristic features of the person with fiery temperament are: distressed with 
hunger, restless, lean and thin body, learned, consumes a large quantity of food, sharp, 
fair-complexioned and proud. 


7. ... earthy: emits fragrance of camphor and lotus, is fond of luxuries, comforts and 
enjoyments and is permanently happy, forgiving and has a deep voice, like a lion. 


8. ... etheral: acquainted with semasiology, expert in diplomacy, brilliant, learned, 
unmasked face and long stature. 


9. ... watery: is lustrous, can sustain burdens, is soft-spoken, king, has many friends and 
is learned. 


10. ... airy: charitable, full of anger, fair complexion, fond of wandering, victorious over 
enemies, king and has lean physique. 


11. When the fire element is predominant in a person, his face and body exhibit lustre, 
like gold and he has happy-looking eyes. He achieves success in all his ventures, is 
victorious over his enemies and gets gains of wealth. 


12. ... earth, the body of the person emits various kinds of fragrances. His nails, hair and 
teeth are are clean. He gets gains of happiness and wealth and is religious-minded. 


13. ... ether, the person is a clever conversationalist and becomes happy by learning to 
songs etc. 


14. ... water, the person’s body is slender, he enjoys good health and tasty food and is 
happy on that account. 


15. ... air, the body is filthy. The person becomes an idiot and suffers from rheumatism, 
sorrows and agonies. 


16. The sage said. O Brahmin! The effects of the elements, which I have described 
above, will be realized in full, if the Grahas concerned are endowed with adequate 
strength. If they are weak, the effects will be reduced in proportion to their weakness. 


17. If the Grah concerned is in his debilitation Rasi, or be placed in an inauspicious 
Bhava, the elemental effects will be adverse, that is, opposite to the effects, described 
above. If a Grah is without strength, his elemental effects will be experienced only in 
imagination. 


18. Ifa person’s time, date and place of birth is not known, he should determine the 
Dasa of a Grah from the effects, mentioned above and, if he is facing evil effects, he 
should take appropriate remedial measures to appease the Grah concerned. 


Ch. 77. Effects of the Gunas 


1-4. The Great Sage Parasara said. O Brahmin! When the Sattva-Guni Grahas are 
predominant, the person born is Sattva-Guni and of good character. When Rajo-Guna 
(passion of love and pleasure) is predominant, the person born is Rajo-Guna and 
intelligent. When the Tamo-Guna (attribute of darkness) is predominant, the person born 
is stupid. When 


at the time of birth all the Grahas are of equal dominance, the person has a mixture of all 
the attributes. The persons (creatures) so born are classified, as Uttama (most excellent), 
Madhyama (of intermediate type), Adhama (despisable) and Udaseena (indifferent, or 
neutral) in that order. Thus there are four kinds of animate beings (Prani). I will relate 
their attributes, which have been described by Narada and other sages. 


5. The natural attributes of persons, belonging to Uttam class, are possession of control 
over organs of perception and mind, simplicity, truthfulness, patience and satisfaction. 


6. Valour, splendour, patience, cleverness, not retreating in war and protecting the holy 
men are the natural attributes of persons, belonging to Rajo-Guna. 


7. Greed, falsehood, idiocy, laziness and doing service of others are the inborn attributes 
of persons, who belong to Adham class. 


8. Engagement in agriculture and business, protection of cattle and speaking both truth 
and lies are inborn attributes of persons, belonging to Udaseena class. 


9. O Maitreya! Classify the people, as Uttama, Madhyama, Adhama and Udaseena after 
observation of the attributes, described above. A person should be considered 
appropriate for a job, according to his attributes. 


10. If amongst Sattva, Rajas and Tamas any attribute is the most dominant, it is 
considered the most predominant of all. Otherwise all have equal effects. 


11. The affectionate relationship between an employer and employee and man and 
women will be invariable and stable, if they possess the same attributes. 


12. O Maitreya! Amongst the above four classes of persons, if there is any kind of 
relationship of even Adhama with Udaseena, of Udaseena with Madhyama and of 
Madhyama with Uttama, there will be mutual affection and happiness. 


13. If the bridegroom has better attributes than the bride and the master has better 
attributes than the servant, there will be mutual affection (regard for each other) and 
happiness. If the bride, or the servant possesses better attributes, the relationships will be 
full of bitterness. 


14. The attributes of the native are dependent on his father and mother, his time of birth 
and the persons, he gets associated with. These are the root causes of Uttama etc. 
qualities, possessed by him. The attributes, endowed by the time of the birth and 
associations, are stronger than those, received from the parents. 


15. Consequently the person is embellished with the attribute Sattva, Rajas, or Tamas, 
whichever is predominant at the time of birth. The predictions should therefore be made 


after taking into account the time of birth. 


16. The Supreme Lord of the Universe, who is indestructible and omnicient, is the Kal. 
He is the Creator, Protector and Destroyer of all movable and immovable. 


17. These three faculties of Lord Kal are called nature. Divided by these faculties, the 


imperceptible Lord Kal is also perceptible. 


18. In accordance with the self-created qualities by the Perceptible form of Lord Kal, 
there are four kinds of limbs, namely Uttama, Madhyama, Udaseena and Adhama. 


19. From the Uttama, Madhyama, Udaseena and Adhama parts are created Uttama, 
Madhyama, Udaseena and Adhama types of creatures. 


20. The Uttama part of Lord Kal is the head, Madhyama part both arms and chest, thighs 
form the Udaseena part and the feet fall in the Adhama part. 


21. This is how a differentiation is made between classes of movables and immovables, 
according to attributes and the parts, from which the creations are made. 


22. The Chaturvidha (four sided) Lord Kal has thus created this Chaturvidha universe in 
consonance with his own attributes. 


Ch. 78. Lost Horoscopy 


1-2. Maitreya said. O Sage! You have so far described the auspicious and inauspicious 
effects to be enjoyed, or suffered by a person on the basis of the time of birth, but can 
the auspicious and inauspicious be ascertained, when the time of birth is not known? 
Kindly tell me, if there is any way to solve this problem. 


3-4. The Sage said. Your question is a good one and is for the benefit of the world at 
large. Considering your attachment, I will tell you about this problem also. If any, or all 
amongst the Samvatsar, Ayana, Ritu, month, Paksha, Tithi, Nakshatr, Lagn, Rasi, or 
Amsas etc. of the birth are not known, these can be ascertained from Prasna Lagn 


(Query chart). 


5-6. The Samvatsar of the birth of the querist will be the same, as that of the R4si in the 
Dwadasams, in which the Prasna Lagn falls (Guru will be in that Rasi at birth). 
Saumyayan (Uttarayan - the northern course of Surya) will be in the first Hora of Lagn 
and Yamyayan (Dakshinayan - the southern course of Stirya) will be in its second Hora. 
The Ritu (season) may be determined with reference to the Lord of the Drekkan, in 
which Lagn falls. Shishir will be indicated by the Drekkan of Sani, Grishma by that of 
Sirya and Mangal, Vasanta by that of Sukr, Varsha by that of Candr, Sharad by that of 
Budh and Hemanta by that of Guru. 


7. If there be any contradiction in the Ayana and Ritu, the Ritu may be determined from 
Budh in place of Mangal, from Sukr in place of Candr and from Sani in place of Guru. 


8-9. After the Ritu becomes known take the first part of the Drekkan, as its first month 
and latter part, as the next month of the Ritu. Then from the expired Amsas of the 
Drekkan determine proportionately the Tithi, or the Amsas of Stirya. The Istakal, 
indicated by the Amsas (degrees) of Stirya, will be the time of the birth of the querist. 
From the Istakal so calculated have to be worked out the longitudes of the Grahas and 
Bhavas (Grah Spast and Bhava Spast). Predictions should then be made in accordance 
with the dispositions of the Bhavas and Grahas. 


10. Maitreya asked. O Sage! Guru returns to the same Rasi after every 12 years. Then 
from which circle of Guru should Samvatsar be determined. 


11-12. The Sage said in reply. O Maitreya! When there is any doubt about the 
Samvatsar, take the approximate age of the querist and add multiples of 12 to the 
difference between the Rasi of the Guru at the time of query and his RAsi at the time of 
birth. The figure so arrived at should be taken, as the possible number of years and the 
Samvatsar should be determined accordingly. If by adding 12 there may appear to be 
difference in age, the position of Guru should be fixed, according to guessed 
approximate age, in the Trikon R&si, Sth, or 9th of the Prasna Lagn, as may be found 
feasible. Then, taking that, as the Samvatsar, the Ayana, Ritu etc. should be worked out 
accordingly in the manner already explained. 


13. Maitreya asked again. O Sage! How will the time of birth be known after 
ascertaining the month and the Amsas etc. of Stirya. Please explain this for the benefit of 
the people. 


14-16.The Sage said. After ascertaining the Rasi, Amsas etc. of Surya at the time of 
birth, the longitude of Strya (Strya Spast) should be worked out for the next day after 
the number of days, taken by Surya after entering into the Rasi, which will be equal to 
the expired Amsas of Strya. Then the difference between the longitudes of this rising 
Surya and Sirya at the time of birth should be converted into Kalas and multiplied by 
60. The product should be divided by Stirya Spast, converted into Kalas. The Ghatikas 
etc. so becoming available will represent the Istakal of the birth before and after sunrise. 
If the longitude of the Ista Siirya be more than that of the rising Surya, the Istakal of the 
birth will be so much after the sunrise. If the longitude of the Ista Stirya be less than that 
of the rising Siirya, the Istakal of the birth will be so much before the sunrise. 


Ch. 79. Ascetism Yogas 
1. The Sage said. O Brahmin! Now I will describe to you the Yogas, leading to ascetism, 


under the influence of which the persons give up their homes and become initiated in 
some holy order. 


2-3. The Yog for ascetism is formed, when four, or more Grahas, possessed of strength, 
occupy a single Bhava. The person born will become a Tapasvi, a Kapali, he will be 
wearing a red robe, be one, who keeps a Danda (staff), Yati, he will be keeper of a 
Chakr, or he will be a naked Sanyasin, according to the Grah, which is the strongest of 
the group: Surya, Candr, Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr, or Sani. If a number of Grahas are 
endowed with strength, the holy order of the one, strongest amongst them, is accepted. 


Notes. There is a similar verse in Varahamihir’s Brihat Jatak, which, translated into 
English reads, as under. “If at birth, four, or more Grahas, possessed of strength, occupy 
a single Bhava, the person born will become a Sakya, Jeevika, Bhikshu, a Vriddha, or 
Guru, a Charak, a Nirgrantha, or Visava, a Vanyasana, or Vanaprastha, according to 
which of the Grahas is the strongest Grah of the group: Mangal, Budh, Guru, Candr, 
Sukr, Sani, or Stirya. If the strongest Grah be conquered in planetary war by another 
Grah, or Grahas at the time of birth, the person will relinquish that stage of ascetic life 
and review to his previous condition of life.” A Vanaprastha is a religious man, engaged 
in the practice of rigorous and devout penance (i.e. he will be a Tapasvi); a Vivas is a 
naked ascetic (that is dwelling in hills and forests). A Bhikshu is an illustrious ascetic 
with a single staff for his symbol, engaged ever and anon in the contemplation of truths 
of the sacred scriptures. A Charak is a religious mendicant, wandering over many 
countries. A Shakya is an ascetic of the Buddhist clan. A Guru is a celebrated teacher, 
endowed with royal splendour. A Jeevika is a garrulous and gluttonous mendicant. 


4. If strong Grahas, capable of leading to ascetism, be obscure by Sutrya’s rays (that is 
they be combust), the person born, in spite of having reverence for the holy order, will 
not become initiated in that holy order. 


Notes. Brihat Jatak adds in this connection, that, if the Grahas referred to above be 
overcome in planetary war and be aspected by other Grahas, the person concerned will 
seek admission into the holy order without success. 


5. If the other Grahas lose their strength (in spite of being in their exaltation RAsis etc.), 
as a result of combustion with Surya, the native will enter the holy order, as signified by 
Surya, that is, he will become a Tapasvi. 


6. If the Lord of the Rasi, occupied by Candr (Janm Rasi), having no aspect of other 
Grahas on himself, aspects Sani, the native gets initiated into the holy order of the Grah, 
who is stronger amongst the two. 


7. If the Lord of the Rasi, occupied by Candr, be devoid of strength and is aspected only 
by Sani, the native becomes initiated into the holy order, signified by Sani (Nirgranthas, 
naked ascetics). 


8. If Candr be in the decanate of Sani, or in the Navams of Sani, or Mangal and be 
aspected by Sani, the native becomes an ascetic and enters the holy order, signified by 
Sani. 


9. There is planetary war, if Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr and Sani are together (within one 
degree of each other), Sukr is the conquerer, whether he is in North, or South, but 
amongst the other four only one, who is in the North, is the conquerer and that in the 
South is considered defeated in the planetary war. 


10. If the Grah, who leads the native to ascetism, is conquered in planetary war by 
another Grah, or Grahas at the time of birth, the person will relinquish the holy order, in 
which he becomes initiated. 


11. Maitreya asked. O Venerable Sage! If there be many Grahas, who are significators 
for ascetism, then, which holy order the native will get initiated into? 


12. Maharishi Parasara replied. O Brahmin! If all the Grahas be possessed of strength, 
the native enters into the holy orders of all the Grahas. 


13. The native gets initiated into the holy order of the Grah, whose Dasa gets into 
operation at first. Then he relinquishes this holy order of this Grah at the commencement 
of the Dasa of the next Grah and accepts the holy order, signified by him. 


14. When Guru, Candr and Lagn are aspected by Sani and Guru occupies the 9th, the 
person, born in the Rajayog, will become a holy illustrious founder of a system of 
philosophy (holy order). 


15. When Sani occupies the 9th from Lagn and is not aspected by any Grah, the person, 
possessed of Rajayog, will take himself to the holy order, before becoming a Lord of 
men. If there be no Rajayog the native becomes an ascetic (religious wanderer). 


Ch. 80. Female Horoscopy 


1. Maitreya asked. O Sage! You have described the effects of many kinds. Now be kind 
enough to throw light on Stri Jatak (female horoscopy). 


2. Maharishi Parasara replied. What a good question! Listen to what I am going to tell 
you about the Rasi Kundalis of females. All the effects, that have been described till now 
in the case of male horoscopies, will apply to females also. Matters, relating to her 
physical appearance, should be determined from Lagn, those, relating to children, from 
the 5th Bhava, fortune for the husband from the 7th and death of the husband 
(widowhood) should be deduced from the 8th. Those effects, which are impossible to 


ascribe to the female, should be declared to be applicable to her husband. 


Brihat Jatak. “Of the effects, that have been described till now in the case of male 
horoscopes and those, that may be found in female horoscopes, suitable to females, 
should be declared, as applicable to them alone. The rest should be ascribed to their 
husbands. The death of the husband is to be deduced through the 8th place (from Lagn, 
or Candr, whichever is stronger). Matters, relating to her appearance, beauty etc., should 
be determined from Lagn and the Rasi, occupied by Candr. It is from the 7th place (from 
Lagn, or Candr), that her welfare (happiness) and the nature of the husband should be 
ascertained.” 


Mantreswara’s Phaldeepika. “Whatever effects are declared for men, they are entirely 
applicable to women too. The woman’s prosperity and happiness have to be deduced 
from the 8th place (from Lagn, or Candr, whichever is stronger). Children should be 
declared from the 9th Bhava and matters, relating to her appearance, beauty etc., should 
be determined from Lagn. It is from the 7th place, that her welfare (power of influencing 
her husband) and the nature of the husband should be ascertained, while her association 
and chastity should be predicted from an examination of the 4th Bhava. Benefics in 
those Bhavas produce good results, while malefics in the above Bhavas are productive 
of evil, unless they happen to own the Bhavas, in which case the effects will be good.” 


Jatak Parijata. Whatever effects may accrue from the horoscopes of females, applicable 
only to men, should be ascribed to the husband. The good and evil, affecting their 
person, should be calculated from Candr and Lagn, whichever of them is stronger. It is 
from the 7th Bhava from Lagn, or Candr, that all, that is worthy, or unworthy in the 
husband should be ascertained and the death of the husband is foretold through the 8th. 
All this should be well weighed by the strength, or weakness of the Grahas, benefic and 
malefic. Before an announcement is made, of Lagn and Candr find, which is stronger. It 
is with reference to this, that the luck, beauty and strength of the women should be 
announced. Children and wealth in abundance should be declared through the 9th Bhava 
therefrom. Wedded happiness, or otherwise should be gathered from the 8th and 
husband’s fortune from the 7th. Some Jyotishis opine, that the well-being, or the 
reverses of the husband can be determined from the 9th. 


5. If at the time of birth of a woman Lagn and Candr are in even Rasis, the woman will 
be truly feminine in character. She will possess excellent qualities, be of steadfast 
character, beautiful and physically fit. 


6. If Lagn and Candr are in odd RaAsis, she will be masculine in form and masculine in 
bearing and, if they be associated with, or aspected by malefics, she will be devoid of 
good qualities and be sinful. 


7. If amongst Lagn and Candr one be in an even R&si and the other be in an odd one, the 
woman concerned should be declared to partake the characteristics of both male and 
female. The qualities of Lagn, or Candr will be more predominant, according to their 
strength. 


8. O Brahmin! The effects in respect of women would particularly depend on the Rasi 
and Trimsams of Lagn, or Candr, whichever is stronger. 


9-16. When Lagn, or Candr is in a Rasi, belonging to Mangal, the woman, born in a 
Trimsams of Mangal, will have illicit relations with a man before marriage. If she be 
born in Trimsams of Sukr, she will become unchaste after marriage; if of Budh, she will 
be full of guile and adept in conjuration; if the Trimsams be of Guru, she will be worthy 
and virtuous; she will be menial, or slave, if birth be in a Trimsams of Sani. ... in a Ragi, 
owned by Budh, the female, born in a Trimsams of Mangal, will be full of guile, will be 
a hard-worker; if the Trimsams be of Sukr, will be possessed of good qualities; if of 
Budh, will be of the nature of hermaphrodite; if of Guru, will be chaste. In a Rasi, 
owned by Sukr, a female, born in a Trimsams of Mangal, will be deprived; if the 
Trimsams be of Sukr, will be well known and possessed of excellent qualities; if of 
Budh, will be skilled in all arts; she will be endowed with all good qualities, if born in a 
Trimsams of Guru; she will remarry, if born in a Trimsams of Sani. When Lagn, or 
Candr happens to be in a Rasi, owned by Candr and the Trimsams of birth is owned by 
Mangal, the female born will be self-willed and uncontrolled; she will be unchaste and 
of loose character, if born in a Trimsams of Sukr; will be skilled in arts and handiwork, 
if of Budh; will be gifted with all excellent qualities, if of Guru; will become a widow, if 
of Sani. ..., owned by Siirya and the Trimsams of birth be owned by Mangal, the female 
born will be very talkative; she will be virtuous, if born in a Trimsams of Sukr; will bear 
masculine features, if of Budh; will be chaste and virtuous, if of Guru; will be unchaste, 
if of Sani. When the rising Rasi, or the Rasi, occupied by Candr, is owned by Guru, the 
female, born in a Trimsams of Mangal, will be endowed with many good qualities; she 
will be Punschali, if born in a Trimsams of Sukr; will be well versed in many sciences, if 
of Budh; will be endowed with all good qualities, if of Guru; will not indulge much in 
sexual intercourse, if of Sani. When Lagn, or the Rasi, occupied by Candr, belongs to 
Sani, the female, born in a Trimsams of Mangal, will be a maid-servant; she will be 
learned (barren, according to Brihat Jatak), if born in a Trimsams of Sukr; will be cruel 
and immoral, if of Budh; will be devoted to her husband, if of Guru; will be unchaste 
(addicted to men of low caste, according to Brihat Jatak), if of Sani. 


17-21. If the 7th Bhava be without a Grah (without strength) and without benefic aspect, 
the female born will have a coward and contemptible wretch for her husband. When the 
7th Bhava is a moveable Rasi, the husband will always be away from home. If Budh and 
Sani be in the 7th Bhava, the husband of the woman concerned will be impotent. If 
Siirya occupies the 7th Bhava, the woman concerned is abandoned by her husband. If 


Mangal be in the 7th, the female concerned becomes a widow in her childhood. If Sani 
be in the 7th, she lives to an old age, remaining unmarried. If there be a malefic, she 
becomes a widow, while young. If there be a benefic in the 7th, the female born will 
enjoy marital happiness and will be chaste. If there be both benefics and malefics in the 
7th, both benefic and evil effects will be experienced. If Mangal be in the Navams of 
Sukr and Sukr be in the Navams of Mangal, the female concerned will have illicit 
relations with other men. If in this Yog Candr be in the 7th, the female concerned enters 
into illicit connections at the instance of her husband. 


22-25. If at woman’s birth the 7th Bhava, or the setting Navams be that of Mangal, the 
husband will be fond of other women and will be of an irascible temper. If it be a Rsi, 
or 


Navams of Budh, her husband will be very learned and clever. If it be a Rasi, or Navams 
of Guru, the husband of the woman concerned will be of great merit and will have 
passions under his control. If it be a Rasi, or Navams of Sukr, her husband will be 
fortunate, very good-looking and liked by women. If the Rasi, or Navams belongs to 
Sani, her husband will be an old man and a fool. If the Rasi, or Navams be Simh, her 
husband will be exceedingly soft in his disposition and will be very hard-working. If the 
7th Bhava, or the setting Navams be a Rasi, owned by Candr, the husband of the woman 
will be love-sick and gentle. If there be different Rasis and Navamsas in the 7th, the 
effects will be of a mixed nature. The effects of the Rasis and Navamsas will depend on 
their strength. 


26-29. If in a female’s horoscope Surya be in the 8th, the native will be unhappy, 
poverty-stricken, of deformed limbs and without faith in religion. If Candr be in the 8th, 
the woman concerned will be of a defective vagina, will have ugly breasts, with sinister 
eyes, without robes, or ornaments, sickly and will be defamed in the society. If Mangal, 
the native will be of weak constitution, sickly, widow, ugly-looking and full of sorrows 
and agonies. If Budh, she will be without faith in religion, timid, devoid of wealth, self- 
respect and good qualities and she will be quarrelsome. 


30-33. If in a female’s horoscope Guru be in the 8th, the woman concerned will be 
shameless and without virtue, will have few children, fatty hands and feet, will be 
abandoned by her husband and be gluttonous. If Sukr be in the 8th, she will be fond of 
pleasures, devoid of sympathy, religion, wealth, will be dirty and deceptive. If Sani, the 
woman concerned will be of wicked disposition, dirty, deceptive and devoid of conjugal 
harmony. If Rahu, she will be ugly, without marital happiness, cruel-hearted, sickly and 
unchaste. 


34. The woman will be barren, if in her RASi Kundali Candr and Sukr be associated with 
Sani, or Mangal and the Sth Bhava be occupied, or aspected by a malefic. 


35. If the 7th be in the Navams of Mangal, the vagina will be diseased. If the 7th be the 
Navams of a benefic, she will have a well formed female organ and will be beloved by 
her husband. 


36. If Mithun, or Kanya Lagn in a female’s horoscope is occupied by Sukr and Candr, 
the woman concerned lives happily and is equipped with all kinds of comforts in her 
father’s house. 


37. If Candr, Budh and Sukr be in Lagn, the woman concerned is endowed with many 
good qualities and happiness. If Guru be in Lagn, she is happy, wealthy and has 
children. 


38. If the 8th Bhava be Simh, or Kark and Siirya and Candr be both placed there, the 
woman concerned will be barren. If the 8th be Mithun, Kanya, or Kark and Budh and 
Candr be posited there, the female native will have only one child. 


39. The woman concerned will be definitely barren, if Lagn be Mesh, Vrischik, Makar, 
or Kumbh and Candr and Sukr be posited there, aspected by malefics. 


40. The woman concerned will give birth to an already dead child, if the 7th be occupied 
by Rahu and Sirya, or Guru and Rahu be in the 8th and the Sth be occupied by malefics. 


41. The woman concerned will not be able to conceive, if Guru and Sukr be associated 
with Mangal in the 8th, or Mangal be with Sani in the 8th. 


42. The woman concerned becomes a destructor of her husband’s family and her father’s 
family, if at her birth Candr and Lagn be subjected to Papa Kartari Yog (direct malefics 
in 12th and retrograde malefics in 2nd). 


43. The woman, whose birth takes place under the following conditions, is named, as 
Visha Kanya. Day of birth Sunday, Nakshatr Aslesha, 2nd Tithi; Saturday, Krittika, 7th 
Tithi; Tuesday, Satabhisha, 12th Tithi. 


44. The woman will be Visha Kanya, if at birth Lagn be occupied by a malefic and a 
benefic and two Grahas be in inimical Rasis. 


45. Visha Kanya gives birth to a child already dead. She has a defective generative organ 
and is bereft of robes, ornaments etc. 


46. The evil effects of Visha Kanya are destroyed, if the Lord of the 7th is a benefic, or a 
benefic Grah be in the 7th from Lagn, or Candr. 


47. The woman born becomes a widow, if Mangal be in the 12th, 4th, 7th, or 8th from 
Lagn, without aspect by, or association with any benefic. 


48-49. The Yog, which causes the woman to become widow also causes a male native to 
become a widower. If the man and woman, possessing this Yog, join in wedlock, the Yog 
ceases to have any effect. 


50-51. If at a woman’s birth the rising Rasi be that of Sukr and the rising Navams be of 
Sani (Kumbh, according to Brihat Jatak) and, if Sukr and Sani aspect each other, or are 
occupying each other’s Navams, she will be afflicted with too much lust and will allay 

her fire of passion with the help of other females, acting the part of a male. 


52. When Guru, Mangal, Budh and Sukr are strong and, when the rising Ragi is an even 
one, the woman born will be learned in Shastras and an expounder of the Vedanta 
Philosophy. 


53. When a malefic Grah is in the 7th and some Grah in the 8th, the woman concerned 
will become an ascetic. 


54. The woman dies before her husband, when in her nativity there is a benefic in the 
8th, without aspect by, or association with a malefic. 


55. If at the birth of a woman there are equal number of benefics and malefics and they 
possess the same strength, she without doubt will leave for her heavenly abode along 
with her husband. 


Ch. 81. Effects of Characteristic Features of Parts of Woman’s body. 


1-2. Maitreya said. O Venerable Sage! I have been fully enlightened by the auspicious 
and inauspicious effects, described by you with reference to the Janm Lagn in a female’s 
horoscope. Now I request you to favour me with knowledge of auspicious and 
inauspicious effects with reference to the characteristic features of the various parts of a 
woman’s body. Maharishi Parasara replied. O Brahmin! Now I will tell you what Lord 
Shiva narrated to Goddess Parvati in this regard. 


3-4. A woman, whose soles are even, smooth, soft, well developed, warm and shining in 
pink colour, without much perspiration, will be enjoying full happiness, befitting her 
sex. The one, whose soles are without pink colour, hard, dry, coarse, uneven, shaped, 
like a winnowing basket and bereft of flesh, will suffer misery. 


5-6. The woman, who has marks of conch, Swastika, Chakr, lotus, flag, fish, umbrella 


and a long line, rising upwards in her soles, becomes a queen and enjoys great happiness 
and comforts. The one, who possesses marks, like those of snake, rat and crow, is bereft 
of wealth and suffers misery. 


7. The girl, whose nails of toes are shining in pink colour, smooth, raised and round, 
enjoys great happiness and comforts. Blackish and torn nails denotes misery. 


8. Raised, full, well developed, smooth and round great toe indicates happiness. The 
one, which is small, irregular in shape and flat, denotes misery. 


9. The woman’s toes, which are soft, thick, round and well developed are considered 
auspicious. If the toes are long, she will be of loose morals. Thin toes indicate poverty. 


10-16. Other effects about the toes are, as under. Short - short life. Short and long and 
irregular in shape - procurer and guileful. Flat - maid-servant. Spaced more than average 
- bereft of wealth. Toes, overlapping one over the other - widow and dependent on 
others. If dust is thrown up, when she walks - unchaste and brings defame to all the three 
families (her father’s, mother’s and husband’s). If the smallest toe does not touch the 
ground - she will destroy her husband and marry another; If the middle toe and the one 
next to it does not touch the ground - widow. First toe (next to great toe) longer than the 
great toe - she will develop illicit connection with a man before marriage and will be of 
loose morals. 


17. If the back of the feet of a woman is raised, without perspiration, soft and smooth, 
she will become a queen. If the indications are contrary, she will be poverty-stricken. 
She will be fond of travelling, if the back part of the feet be veined. Hair on that portion 
of feet denote, that she will be a maid servant. If the feet be bony, or without flesh, she 
will have a defective sexual organ. 


18. If the heels are even, the woman concerned will have a well formed and desirable 
sexual organ. If the heels be stout, she will have a defective sexual organ. If the heels be 
high, she will be unchaste. Long heels indicate misery. 


19. Legs (portion below knees). Even, smooth, evenly shaped, round, without hair, good 
looking and without veins showing up are Rasis, that the woman will be a queen. 


20. Round, smooth, firm knees are auspicious indications. If the knees be bony, the 
woman concerned will be of loose moral character. If the knees be loose, she will be 
poverty-stricken. 


21. If the thighs are round, like the trunk of an elephant, close to each other, soft and 
without hair, the woman concerned will be a queen. If the thighs are flat and hairy, she 


will be poverty-stricken and a widow. 


22-23. Waist. Circumference equal to the width of 24 fingers with well developed hips 
indicate, that the woman will be fortunate. A waist, which is flat, long, without flesh, 
caved in, or hairy, forebodes widowhood and misery. 


24. Raised, fleshy and widespread hips in a woman are auspicious in effects. If they are 
contrary, they indicate inauspiciousness. 


25-27. Sexual organ. Hidden clitoris, pink-coloured, curved, like the back of a tortoise, 
soft, hairy, shaped, like the leaf of a Pipal tree and smooth is highly auspicious. If 
shaped, like the feet of a deer, or opening of an oven with hard hair and with raised 
clitoris, it indicates evil. If the left side of the sexual organ of a woman is raised, she will 
beget more female children and, if the right side is raised, more boys. If the organ is 
shaped, like a conch, she will be barren. 


28. Portion below the navel. A soft, spread out and slightly raised Vasti is auspicious. 
Hairy, veins, showing up and full of lines (folds, or wrinkles) indicates inauspiciousness. 


29. A navel deep with right turns is productive of good effects. The navel raised, with 
left turns and with knots is inauspicious. 


30-31. A stomach well spread indicates a well formed sexual organ and many sons. If 
the stomach of a woman resembles that of a frog, her son will become a king. If a 
woman has a raised stomach she will be childless. If the stomach is wrinkled, she will 
become an ascetic. If it has circular folds, she will become a maid-servant. 


32. If the portion, covering the ribs, is even, well developed and soft, auspicious effects 
may be expected. It will be inauspicious, if it is raised, hairy and full of veins. 


33. The chest of a woman, which is even and hairless is auspicious. Wide spread and 
hairy chest is inauspicious. 


34-36. The breasts of a woman signify good luck, if they are of equal size, fleshy, round 
and firm, but close together. They are unlucky, if they are thick in front, are not close 
together and without flesh. Raised right breast indicates, that she will have sons. Raised 
left breast indicates, that she will have daughters. If the portion, surrounding the nipples, 
is round, good-looking and blackish, she will enjoy good luck. Pressed in and unusually 
small breasts indicate bad luck. 


37. Shoulders. Even, well built up and without joints showing up are Rasis of good luck. 
Raised, hairy and without flesh are unlucky. 


38. The armpits, if soft, with thin hair, well developed and smooth are auspicious. Those, 
which are deep, without flesh, perspiring and with veins, showing up are inauspicious. 


39-40. Arms, in which the bones do not show up and which are soft jointed, hairless 
without obvious veins, straight and round are auspicious. Those without flesh, hairy, 
small, with obvious veins and irregular in shape are inauspicious. 


41. If the thumbs of the woman are shaped, like a lotus bud, they are auspicious. If they 
are without flesh and irregular in shape, they are inauspicious. 


42-43. If the palms of the woman are pink-coloured, raised in the middle, with fingers 
close together (with no holes between them), soft and have very few lines, she enjoys 

happiness and all comforts. If the palms are full of lines, she will become a widow. If 
there are no lines, she will be poverty-stricken. If the veins show up in the palms, she 

will live on alms. 


44. If the backs of the hands of a woman are well built, soft and hairless, she will enjoy 
auspicious effects. It will be otherwise, if the backs of the hands are with veins, showing 
up, deep and hairy. 


45-47. Lines on the palm. A woman enjoys happiness and all comforts, if there is a 
clearly marked, pink-coloured, circular, smooth, full and deep line (perhaps line of life is 
meant). If there is mark of a fish, she will be very lucky. She will be wealthy with mark 
of Swastika. She will be a queen with mark of a lotus. She will be the mother of a king, 
if she has marks of conch, umbrella and tortoise. 


48-50. The woman, who has lines, forming the shapes of a balance, elephant, bull, or 
horse, becomes the wife of a businessman. The woman, who has lines, forming the 
shape of a house, or Vajra is lucky and gives birth to a son, who becomes learned in 
Shastras. The woman, who has lines, forming the shapes of a chariot, a plough, or a 
yoke, becomes the wife of a farmer. She will become a queen, if she has lines, forming 
the shape of Chamar, Ankush, trident, sword, mace, Shakti, or trumpet. 


51-52. If in the palm of a woman there is a line, which, starting from the root of the 
thumb goes up to the root of the little finger, she becomes a widow. If there are lines, 
forming the shape of a crow, a frog, a jackal, a wolf, a scorpion, a snake, a donkey, a 
camel and a cat, the woman concerned suffers misery. 


53-54. If the fingers of a woman are tender with good-looking phalanges, tapering at the 
end and without hair, they are considered auspicious. If they are very small, without 
flesh, irregular, widely spaced, with hair and with more than usual phalanges, or without 


phalanges, they indicate misery. 


55. If the nails of the fingers are pink-coloured, raised and shaped well at the top, they 
are auspicious. Depressed, dirty-looking, or yellow, or white-coloured nails, or nails 
with spots are inauspicious. 


56. If the back of the woman is fleshy and well developed with flesh, it is auspicious. 
The back with hair, irregular in built and with veins showing up is inauspicious. 


57-58. The neck of a woman with three lines (folds), with bones not obvious, round, 
well developed and tender is auspicious. A thick necked woman becomes a widow. An 
irregularly built neck indicates, that the woman concerned will become a maid-servant. 
Flat necked woman will be barren. A woman with a small neck is childless. 


59. A straight, well developed, somewhat raised throat is auspicious. One without flesh, 
with veins obvious, with hair and irregular in built is inauspicious. 


60. Pink-coloured, tender and firm chin is auspicious. A broad chin with hair and clefts 
is unlucky. 


61. Raised, firm and round cheeks are auspitious. The ones, which are hard-skinned, 
depressed and without flesh are indicative of misfortune. 


62. If the mouth of a woman is of normal size, firm, round, emitting fragrance, smooth 
and good-looking, it is indicative of good luck. If otherwise, it will be inauspicious. 


63-65. If the lower lip of a woman is red, like a lotus, smooth, divided in the middle and 
good looking, she becomes a queen. If it be without flesh, coarse, long, dry and blackish, 
it is indicative of misery and widowhood. If the upper lip of a woman is pink-coloured, 
smooth and slightly raised in the middle, it is indicative of happiness and good fortune. 
If otherwise, it will be inauspicious. 


66-67. A woman, whose teeth are smooth, milk white, 32 in number and whose upper 
and lower teeth, though equal in size, are slightly raised, will be lucky. If lower teeth are 
more in number, are yellow, or black-coloured, fierce looking, widely spaced and 
double, they are indicative of misfortune. 


68-69. If the tongue of a woman is red and soft, she enjoys great happiness and 
comforts. Caved in the middle and spread out in front indicates misery. White tongue 
indicates death in water. Dark tongue indicates quarrelsome nature. Thick tongue 
denotes poverty. Long tongue denotes one, who is omnivorous. Long and broad tongue 
denotes lunacy. 


70-71. Palate red, like lotus, soft and smooth - good luck, white - widowhood, yellow - 
ascetism, black - barrenness, dry - large family. 


72. When a woman laughs, if her cheeks are raised and teeth are not visible, she will be 
lucky. If it is otherwise, she will not be lucky. 


73-74. If the nose of a woman is evenly round and has small nostrils, it is auspicious. If 
the nose is thick in its front part and flat in the middle, it is inauspicious. If the tip of the 
nose is red, or shrunken, widowhood is indicated. Flat nose indicates engagement in a 
menial job. Too small, or too large nose denotes quarrelsome nature. 


75-77. Black pupils with cow’s milk like white portion of the eye, large and broad, 
smooth, with black eyelashes are lucky RAsis. Raised eyes show short life. Round eyes 
denote loose moral character. Honey-coloured eyes indicate good fortune and happiness. 
The eyes, like those of a pigeon, indicate wickedness. Eyes, like those of an elephant, 
indicate misery. If the left eye is blind, adulterous tendency will manifest. Blindness of 
the right eye indicates barrenness. 


78. A woman with soft, black, compact eyelashes with thin hair is fortunate. Eyelashes 
thick, scattered and with tawny-coloured hair indicate misery. 


79. If the eyebrows of a woman are round, shaped, like a bow, smooth, black, not joined 
and with soft hair, she is blessed with happiness and fame. 


80. Ears of a woman long with a round turn indicate children and happiness. Small, 
unevenly shaped, very thin, with veins, showing up, cause her misery. 


81-82. The forehead of a woman without veins, showing through, without hair, shaped, 
like a half-moon, even, with equal to three fingers are Rasis of a fortunate woman, 
blessed with husband and children. Rasi of Swastika on the forehead denotes a queen. 
Very long, highly raised and hairy forehead causes misery. 


83. Head of a woman high and round, like that of an elephant, is indicative of happiness. 
A head, which is spread out, flat, big and uneven, indicates misery. 


84-85. The hair of a woman are indicative of good fortune. If they are soft, black, long, 
thin and yellow, they indicate misfortune. But honey-coloured hair of a fair 
complexioned woman and black hair of a dark complexioned woman are also considered 
auspicious. Most of the characteristic features, described in this chapter, apply to men 
also. 


Ch. 82. Effects of Moles, Marks, Signs etc. for Men and Women 


1. Maharishi Parasara said. O Maitreya! Now I will describe to you the effects of moles, 
marks, spots and signs, found on the body of women and men. 


2-3. A mole, spot, or figure, formed by hair on the left side of a woman and right side of 
a man is auspicious. If there is mole on the chest of a woman, she will be fortunate. A 
woman, who has a red mark, like a mole etc., on her right breast, begets many children 
and she is blessed with all kinds of enjoyments and comforts. 


4. The woman, who has a red mark (mole) on her left breast, begets only one son. 
5. The woman, who has a mole on her right breast, begets many daughters and sons. 


6. There will be gain, or acquisition of a kingdom, if there, as is a red mole etc. on the 
forehead, or in the middle of (between) the eyebrows. The person will enjoy sweetish 
preparations, if there is such a mark on the cheeks. 


7-10. The woman, who has a red mark (mole etc.) on her nose, becomes consort of a 
king. If the mark be blackish, the woman concerned becomes an adulteress, or widow. 
All the marks below the navel are auspicious for both men and women. If there be moles 
etc. on the ears, cheeks, or neck of a man, his first issue will be male and he will enjoy 
good fortune and happiness. The man, who has moles etc. in the thighs, suffers misery. 


11. The woman, who has the sign of trident on her forehead, becomes a queen. Such a 
mark on the forehead of a man makes him a king. 


12. A right-turned circular hair formation on heart, navel, hands, right part of the back 
and in the portion between sex organ and navel is auspicious. Left-turned formation is 
inauspicious. 

13-14. Such a hair formation on the waist and private parts proves inauspicious. If such 
a formation be on the stomach, the woman concerned will become a widow. If it be in 
the center of the back she will become an adulteress. It will be inauspicious, if it be on 
the neck, forehead, or center of the head. 


15. A man with indications of short life will get his longevity prolonged by marrying a 
woman with auspicious, or lucky marks/symbols. 


Ch. 83. Effects of Curses in the Previous Birth 


1-3. Maitreya said. O Venerable Sage! You have acquainted me with effects, experienced 


by men and women in a number of ways. According to Shastras, the soul of a person 
does not rest in peace after his death, if he is not blessed with a son. What sin does a 
person commit to remain without a son? And what are the remedial measures to be 
adopted by him to get a son? Kindly enlighten me about this. 


4. Maharishi Parasara replied. I will now tell you, whatever Lord Shiva told Goddess 
Parvati in this respect. 


5. Goddess Parvati said to Lord Shiva. O my Lord! What is the sin, which causes 
destruction of children amongst men. Please tell me, what are the Yogas for such an 
effect and what are the remedial measures to protect the children? 


6. Lord Shiva replied: O Devi! You have asked a very relevant question. Now I will tell 
you the Yogas for loss of children and the requisite remedial measures. 


7. A person will be without a son, if Guru, the Lord of Lagn and the Lord of the 5th are 
all devoid of strength. 


8. The same will happen, if Stirya, Mangal, Rahu and Sani, endowed with strength, be in 
the Sth and the significator for children, namely Guru and Lord of the 5th etc. be bereft 
of strength. 


9-16. There will be no male issue, due to the curse of a serpent, if at birth Rahu is in the 
5th, aspected by Mangal; the Lord of 5th is associated with Rahu and Candr 1s in the 5th 
and is aspected by Sani; the significator for children (Guru) is associated with Rahu, the 
Lord of the 5th is devoid of strength and the Lord of Lagn is with Mangal; the 
significator for children is associated with Mangal, Lagn is occupied by Rahu and the 
Lord of the 5th is in 6th, 8th, or 12th; Budh, as Lord of the 5th, being in the Navams of 
Mangal, is associated with Mangal and Lagn is occupied by Rahu and Gulika; the Sth is 
Mesh, or Vrischik and the Lord of the 5th is associated with Rahu, or Budh; the 5th is 
occupied by Siirya, Sani, Mangal, Rahu, Budh and Guru and the Lords of the 5th and 
Lagn are devoid of strength; the Lord of Lagn, or Guru is associated with Rahu and the 
Lord of the 5th is in conjunction with Mangal. 


17-19. Remedial measures should be adopted to obtain protection from the evil effects 
of the above Yogas. These are getting an idol of Naga (serpent) Raja, made in gold and, 
after worshipping it in accordance with prescribed procedure, giving in charity a cow, 
some land, sesame seeds and gold etc. By adopting these measures the Lord of Serpents 
will be gratified and by his beneficence the person concerned will be blessed with a son 
and the lineage of his family will be prolonged. 


20-30. There will be no male issue, as a result of the curse of the father in the previous 


birth, if at birth of the native Sirya in his debilitation Rasi and in the Navams of Sani is 
hemmed in between malefics in the 5th Bhava; Surya, as Lord of the 5th, posited in a 
Trikon with a malefic, is hemmed in between malefics and is also aspected by a malefic; 
Guru occupies the Rasi of Stirya, the Lord of the Sth is with Stirya and Lagn and the Sth 
are occupied by malefics; Lord of Lagn, devoid of strength, is in the Sth and the Lord of 
the 5th is combust and Lagn and the Sth are occupied by malefics; there is exchange of 
Bhavas between Lords of the 5th and the 10th and Lagn and the Sth are occupied by 
malefics; Mangal, as the Lord of the 10th, is associated with the Lord of the 5th and 
Lagn, the 5th and the 10th are occupied by malefics; Lord of the 10th is in the 6th, 8th, 
or 12th, Guru is in a malefic Rasi and the Lord of Lagn and the Sth are associated with 
malefics; Sirya, Mangal and Sani are in Lagn and the Sth and Rahu and Guru are in the 
8th and the 12th; Sirya is in the 8th, Sani in the Sth, the Lord of the 5th is associated 
with Rahu and Lagn is occupied by a malefic; Lord of 12th is in Lagn, Lord of 8th in 5th 
and Lord of 10th in 8th; Lord of 6th is in 5th, Lord of 10th in 6th and Guru is associated 
with Rahu. 


31-33. To get deliverance form the curse of the father the remedial measures are 
performance of Shraddha at Gaya; to feed ten thousand, one thousand, or 100 Brahmins, 
as one can afford; Kanyadana (to perform the marriage of a girl); giving a cow in 
charity. By observing these remedial measures, the person concerned becomes free from 
the curse and the family lineage is prolonged by the birth of sons, grandsons etc. 


Note. In this chapter, where the words ‘childlessness’ and ‘issue-lessness’ are used, they 
should be interpreted to mean want of male issue, because it is the male issue, who by 
performing the last rites of his father and mother ensures eternal peace to their souls. 


34-50. A person will be without a male issue, as a result of curse of the mother, if at birth 
Candr, as Lord of the 5th is in her debilitation Rasi, or is hemmed in between malefics 
and 4th and 5th are occupied by malefics; Sani is in 11th, 4th is occupied by malefics 
and Candr is posited in the Sth in her debilitation Rasi; Lord of 5th is in 6th, 8th, or 12th, 
Lord of Lagn in his debilitation Rasi and Candr is associated with malefics; Lord of 5th 
is in 8th, 6th, or 12th, Candr in a malefic Navams and there are malefics in Lagn and in 
5th; Lord of 5th and Candr, associated with Sani, Rahu and Mangal, are in Sth, or 9th; 
Mangal, as Lord of 4th is associated with Sani and Rahu and 5th and Lagn are occupied 
by Siirya and Candr, respectively; Lords of Lagn and Sth are in 6th, Lord of 4th in 8th 
and Lagn is occupied by Lord of 8th and 10th; Lagn is occupied by the Lords of 6th and 
8th, Lord of 4th is in 12th and Candr and Guru, associated with malefics, are in the 5th; 
Lagn is hemmed in between malefics, waning Candr is in 7th and 4th and Sth are 
occupied by Rahu and Sani, respectively; there is exchange of Bhavas between Lords of 
5th and 8th and the Lord of 4th and Candr are in 6th, 8th, or 12th; Kark Lagn is 
occupied by Mangal and Rahu and Candr and Sani are in 5th; Mangal, Rahu, Siirya and 
Sani are in Lagn, 5th, 8th and 12th, respectively, and the Lords of Lagn and 4th are in 


6th, 8th, or 12th; Mangal, Rahu and Guru are in 8th and Sani and Candr are in Sth. For 
release from this curse and to beget a male issue the person concerned should take bath 
in the sea with bridge of rocks between India and Sri Lanka, recite one Lakh Gayatri 
Mantras, give in charity things, connected with evil Grahas, feed Brahmins and go round 
a Pipal tree 1008 times. By performing these remedial measures, he will not only beget a 
son, the lineage of family will also be prolonged. 


51-61. A person will be without a male issue, as result of the curse of the brother, if at 
birth Lord of 3rd with Rahu and Mangal is in 5th and Lords of Lagn and Sth are in 8th; 
Lagn and 5th 


are occupied by Mangal and Sani, respectively, the Lord of 3rd is in 9th and Mangal, the 
significator for brothers, is in 8th; Guru in his debilitation R4si is in 3rd, Sani in Sth and 
Candr and Mangal are in 8th; Lord of Lagn is in 12th, Mangal in 5th and Lord of 5th, 
associated with a malefic, in 8th; Lagn and the 5th are hemmed in between malefics and 
the Lord of Lagn and 5th are in 6th, 8th, or 12th; the 3rd is occupied by the Lord of 10th 
along with a malefic and a benefic is with Mangal in Sth; the 5th in a Rasi of Budh is 
occupied by Sani and Rahu and Budh and Mangal are in 12th; the 3rd is occupied by the 
Lord of Lagn, the Lord of 3rd occupies the 5th and Lagn, 3rd and 5th are with malefics; 
Lord of 3rd is in 8th and Guru is associated with Sani in 5th; Lord of 8th is in 5th along 
with the Lord of 3rd and Mangal and Sani are in 8th. 


62-64. The person concerned will, without doubt, get release from the curse, will be 
blessed with a son and the prolongation of his family lineage will be ensured, if the 
following remedial measures are adopted. He should observe the Candryana fast after 
listening to Haribansa Puran. He should plant a sapling of Pipal in front of Saligram on 
the banks of the Caveri river, or on the Ganga, or Mahanadi and offer prayers to it. He 
should give 10 cows in charity through his wife. He should give in charity land with 
mango trees, planted on it. 


65-68. A person will be without a male issue, as a result of the curse of the maternal 
uncle, if at birth the 5th is occupied by Budh, Guru, Mangal and Rahu and Sani is in 
Lagn; the 5th is occupied by the Lords of Lagn and of 5th along with Sani, Mangal and 
Budh; Lagn is occupied by a combust Lord of 6th, Sani is in 7th and Lord of Lagn is 
associated with Budh; Lords of Lagn and 4th are in Lagn and Candr, Budh and Mangal 
are in 5th. 


69-70. To get release from the curse and for being blessed with a son and for ensuring 
the prolongation of the lineage of the family the following remedial measures are to be 
adopted. Installation of an idol of Lord Vishnu. Construction of a deep, or ordinary well, 
dam, or reservoir, or all of them. 


71-78. If a person, mad with power and wealth, insults a Brahmin, he remains without a 
male issue in the next birth. A person will be without a male issue, as a result of the 
curse of a Brahmin, if at birth Rahu is in Guru’s Rasi and Guru in Sth; Lord of 9th is in 
Sth and Lord of 5th in 8th along with Guru, Mangal and Rahu; Lord of 9th is in his 
debilitation Rasi and Lord of 12th, associated with Rahu, is in 5th; Guru is in his 
debilitation Rasi, Rahu in Lagn, or 5th and Lord of 5th in 6th, 8th, or 12th; Lord of 5th 
and Guru, associated with malefics, are in 8th, or the Lord of 5th, associated with Strya 
and Candr, is in 8th; Guru, being in the Navams of Sani, is associated with Sani and 
Mangal and the Lord of 5th is in 12th; Guru is associated with Sani in Lagn and Rahu is 
in 9th, or Rahu is with Guru in 12th. These are Yogas, which reveal the curse of 
Brahmin in the previous birth. 


79-81. To obtain relief from the evil effects of the above Yogas the remedial measures 
are to observe Candrayana fast and to do penance three times and to give in charity a 
cow and five gems with gold, after feeding Brahmins, according to one’s means and 
giving them presents in cash. Then the person will be released from the curse and will be 
endowed with happiness. 


82-92. A person does not beget a male issue, as a result of the curse of the wife, if at 
birth Lord of Lagn is in 5th, Sani in the Navams of Lord of 7th and Lord of 5th in 8th; 
Lord of 7th is in 8th, Lord of 12th in Sth and Guru is associated with a malefic; Sukr is 
in 5th, Lord of 7th in 8th and 5th is occupied by a malefic; the 2nd and 5th are occupied 
by a malefic and Lord of 7th is in 8th; Sukr is in 9th, Lord of 7th in 8th and Lagn and 
5th are occupied by malefics; Sukr is Lord of 9th, Lord of 5th is in an inimical Rasi and 
Lord of Lagn and 7th and Guru are in 6th, 8th, or 12th; 


the Sth is Vrishabh, or Tul, occupied by Strya and Candr and 12th, Lagn and 2nd are 
occupied by malefics; Sani and Sukr are in 7th, Lord of 8th is in 5th and Lagn is 
occupied by Siirya and Rahu; Mangal occupies 2nd, Guru is in 12th and Sukr and Rahu 
are in 5th; Lords of 2nd and 7th are in 8th, Mangal and Sani occupy Sth and Lagn, 
respectively, and Guru is associated with a malefic; Rahu is in Lagn, Sani in 5th, Mangal 
in 9th and Lords of 5th and 7th are in 8th. 


93-94. The person concerned gets release from the curse and is blessed with a son, if he 
performs the marriage of an unmarried girl, or, if such a girl is not available, a gold idol 
of the Lakshminarayana, fertile cow, a bed, ornaments and garments to a Brahmin 
couple. 


Notes. According to our view, “Kanyadana’ does not mean giving a girl in charity, but 
helping in the performance of the marriage of an unmarried girl, not his own daughter. 


95-105. If the person, whose duty is to do so, does not perform Shraddha of his father, or 


mother in his previous birth, the departed soul is formed into an evil spirit and he is 
deprived of a male issue in the next birth. This is revealed by the following Yogas at 
birth. Sani and Siirya in 5th, waning Candr in 7th and Rahu and Guru in 12th; Sani, as 
Lord of 5th in 8th, Mangal in Lagn and Guru in 8th; Malefics are in Lagn, Surya in 12th, 
Mangal, Sani and Budh are in 5th and the Lord of Sth is in 8th; Rahu is in Lagn, Sani in 
5th and Guru in 8th; Sukr, Guru and Rahu are in Lagn, associated with Candr and Sani 
and the Lord of Lagn are in 8th; Lord of 5th and Guru are in their debilitation RAsis, 
aspected by debilitated Grahas; Sani is in Lagn, Rahu in 5th, Siirya in 8th and Mangal in 
12th; Lord of 7th is in 6th, 8th, or 12th, Candr is in 5th, Sani and Gulika are in Lagn; 
Lord of 8th along with Sani and Sukr is in 5th and Guru is in his debilitation Rasi. 


106-108. The person concerned gets release from the curse and is blessed with a son, if 
he undertakes the following remedial measures. Performance of a Pinda Dana, Rudra 
Abhisheka, giving in charity a gold idol of Brahma, a cow, a vessel, made of silver and a 
Neelamani, feeding Brahmins and giving them presents in cash. 


109-111. Ifa person is deprived of a male issue, as a result of malevolence of Grahas at 
birth, he will be blessed with a son, if he undertakes the following remedial measures. 
Worshipping Lord Shiva, if the harm is, as a result of the malevolence of Budh and 
Sukr; reciting of Santan Gopal Mantra, wearing and worshipping appropriate Yantra and 
taking suitable medicines, if the childlessness is a result of the malevolence of Guru and 
Candr; Kanya Dana, if the childlessness is due to malevolence of Rahu; worshipping of 
Lord Vishnu, if it is due to malevolence of Stirya; Rudriya Japa, if it is due to the 
malevolence of Mangal and Sani. Listening with devotion to Haribansh Puran removes 
all kinds of blemishes and blesses the person concerned with a son. 


Ch. 84. Remedial Measures from the Malevolence of Grahas 


1. Maitreya said. O Venerable Sage! Please describe for the good of mankind the 
remedial measures for appeasement of the malevolent Grahas. 


2. The Sage replied. I have already described the names and characteristic features and 
qualities of the Grahas. Joys and sorrows of all the creatures in the world are dependent 
on these Grahas. Therefore persons desirous of peace, wealth and prosperity, rainfall, 
good 


health and longevity should worship the Grahas (by prayers, recitation of Mantras, 
charity etc.). 


3-5. For the purpose of worshipping them the idols of Surya, Candr, Mangal, Budh, 
Guru, Sukr, Sani, Rahu and Ketu should be made of copper, Sphatika (rock crystal), red 
sandal wood, gold (both Budh and Guru), silver, iron, glass and bell metal, respectively. 


Alternatively the sketches of all the above Grahas should be drawn in the colours, 
belonging to them, on a piece of cloth by sandal etc. and they should be placed in their 
own directions. 


6. Contemplate of Surya well adorned with two arms, seated on a lotus, with a lotus 
flower in one hand, red-coloured, like lotus and aboard a chariot of seven horses. 


7. Contemplate of Candr white-coloured, dressed in white robes, with two arms, 
carrying a mace in one hand and a Vara in the other, adorned with white-coloured 
ornaments and aboard a chariot of ten horses. 


8. Contemplate of Mangal with a red necklace, dressed in red-coloured robes, with four 
arms, carrying Shakti, Shoola, Gada (mace) and Vara and mounted on a lamb. 


9. Contemplate of Budh with a yellow-coloured garland, dressed in yellow robes, with 
four arms, carrying a sword, a shield, a mace and Vara, mounted on a lion. 


10. Contemplate of Guru, as yellow complexion and Sukr of fair complexion, both with 
four arms, carrying a Danda, Akshasutra, Kamandal and Vara. 


11. O Maitreya! Contemplate of Sani with the lustre, like that of Indraneela, with four 
arms, carrying Shoola, bow, arrow and Vara, mounted on a donkey. 


12. Contemplate of Rahu with a hideous face, with four arms, carrying a sword, a shield, 
a Shoola and a Vara, blue-coloured and mounted on a lion. 


13. There are many Ketus. All of them are of smoky colour, with two arms, carrying a 
mace and a Vara, with a hideous face and mounted on a donkey. 


14. All the idols should be so made, that they are 108 fingers tall by one’s own fingers. 
Notes. Such a measurement is taken from the middle finger. 


15-16. Dedicate with devotion to the Grah concerned the flowers and garments of the 
colour, belonging to him, sandal, Deep, Guggul etc., his metal and the grains, dear to 
him and distribute all these things to Brahmins to appease the Grah. 


17-20. The Mantras of all the Grahas and the prescribed number of their recitation are 
given below. The recitation of Mantras should be done after worshipping the Grahas, as 
indicated in verses 15-16. Grah Mantra prescribed number: Surya 7000, Candr 11000, 
Mangal 11000, Budh 9000, Guru 19000, Sukr 16000, Sani 23000, Rahu 18000, Ketu 
17000. 


21-22. Havan should be performed with Aak, Palash, Khair, Chirchiri, Pipal, Goolar, 
Shami wood pieces, Doob and Kush, for Sirya, Candr, Mangal, Budh, Guru, Sukr, Sani, 
Rahu and 


Ketu, respectively, mixed with honey, Ghi, curd, or milk. The number of offerings to the 
sacred fire is 108, or 28. 


23-24. To appease Strya and the other eight Grahas Brahmins should be fed with 
(cream) of rice cooked with jaggery, rice cooked in milk, Havishya, paddy cooked in 
milk, curd and rice, rice with Ghi, rice cooked with powder of sesame seeds, rice cooked 
with meat, rice cooked with cereals, respectively. 


25. To appease Surya and other Grahas the things to be given in charity are cow with 
calf, conch, bullock, gold, robes, horse, black cow, weapons made of iron and goat, 
respectively. 


26-27. The Grah, who is the cause of adverse effects to a person at any time, should be 
handled by worship and appeasing (of the benevolent ones), because Brahma has 
blessed the Grahas with the boon “Do to the persons, who worship you”. And the 
development and progress and downfall of the people and the creation and destruction of 
the universe are all under the administration and authority of the Grahas. Therefore they 
are most venerable. 


Ch. 85. Inauspicious Births 


1-4. The Venerable Sage said. O Maitreya! Now I will describe to you the 
circumstances, in which the births are inauspicious in spite of Lagn and the Grahas 
being well disposed. Although Lagn may be well disposed, births will be inauspicious, if 
they take place on Amavasya (last day of the Krishna Paksha), on Chaturdasi (14th 
Tithi), in Krishna Paksha (dark half of the month), in Bhadra Karan, in the Nakshatr of 
the brother, in the Nakshatras of father and mother, at the time of entry of Stirya in a 
Rasi, the time of Pata, at the time of solar and lunar eclipses, at the time of Vyati Pata, in 
Gandantas of all the three kinds, in Yamaghant, Tithikshaya, in Dagdha Yog etc. The 
birth of a son after three daughters and birth of a daughter after three sons and the birth 
of a freak are inauspicious. But there are remedial measures for obtaining relief from the 
evil effects of such births, which are being described in the following chapters. 


Ch. 86. Remedies for Amavasya Birth 


1-9. The Sage Parasara said. O Maitreya! The person, born on Amavasya, is always 
poverty stricken. It is therefore essential to adopt remedial measures to obtain relief from 


the evil effects of such births, which are, as follows. Take a Kalash (water vessel) and 
then put in it fresh leaves of Goolar (wild fig), Vata (banyan), Pipal, mango and Neema 
(mango) trees and cover it with two pieces of cloth. Then install the Kalash in the South- 
West direction after reciting ... etc. and ... etc. Mantras. Then worship the idols of Stirya 
and Candr, ruling deities of Amavasya, made of gold and silver, mixed with copper, 
respectively, by recitation of ... etc. Mantras for Strya and ... etc. Mantras for Candr 16, 
or 5 times. Thereafter perform Havan with 108, or 28 oblations of the mixture of 
prescribed fuels (...) and cooked food (Charu) with recitation of Mantras of Strya and 
Candr. Later sprinkle the water on the child, that is born and his parents and offer in 
charity gold, silver and a black cow together with feeding the Brahmins, according to 
one’s means. By performing these remedial rites the child born gains freedom and 
protection from the evil effects of the birth on Amavasya. 


Ch. 87. Remedies from Birth on Krishna Chaturdashi 


1-3. The Sage said. Divide the span of Chaturdashi in 6 parts. The birth in the first part is 
auspicious. Second part causes destruction, or death of father. Third part causes death of 
the mother. Fourth part takes away the maternal uncle. Fifth part destroys the entire 
family (Khula - generation). Sixth part causes loss of wealth, or destruction (death) of 
the native. Therefore it is essential to take immediate remedial measures to escape these 
evil effects. 


4-5. Have an idol of Lord Shiva, made of one Karsha (equal in weight to the former 
silver Rupee) of gold, or of weight one can afford. The idol should have a New Moon on 
the forehead, have a white garland round the neck, have three eyes (one being on the 
forehead), be dressed in white robes, be seated on a bull, be two-armed and carry Vara 
and Abhaya. 


6-13. Then after invocation with Varun Mantra worship should be performed by 
chanting ... etc. Mantras. Thereafter a Kalash should be placed in the North-East 
direction with chanting of ‘Imah Mai Varun’, ‘Tan Tva Yami’, ‘Tvan Nai Agni’ Mantras, 
followed by Japa of ... etc. and ‘Bhadra Agni ...’ Suktas and the chanting of ... Mantra. 
Then, after sprinkling water over the idol of Lord Shiva (Abhisheka), the nine Grahas 
should be worshipped. This should be followed by Havan, by using Ghi, powder of 
sesame seeds, Urda, Sarson and wood pieces of Pipal, Pakar, Palas and Khadir trees. 
108, or 28 oblations should be made separately for the nine Grahas. Thereafter, along 
with chanting of ... etc. Mantras, Havan should be performed with sesame seeds for the 
nine Grahas. Lastly the water of the Kalash should be sprinkled on the native and his 
parents and the Brahmins should be fed, according to means. 


Ch. 88. Remedies from Birth in Bhadra and Inauspicious Yogas 


1-2. The Sage said. O Brahmin! Now I am going to describe the remedial measures for 
relief from the evil effects of birth in Bhadra, Tithi Kshaya, Vyatipata, Paridha, Vajra etc. 
inauspicious Yogas and Yamaghants etc. The remedial rites should be performed on the 
day, when the same inauspicious Yog operates again. 


3-5. The remedial rites are to be performed in the following order by the parents of the 
child in the above inauspicious Yogas. Puja of Lord Vishnu and other deities on an 
auspicious day and auspicious Lagn on the advice of a proficient Jyotishi, burning of 
Deep with Ghi in a Shiva temple, Abhisheka of Lord Shiva, going round a Pipal tree 108 
times prolongs longevity and perform Havan with 108 oblations along with the recital of 
“Vaisneh Raratmachityadhi’ Mantra of Lord Vishnu and feeding Brahmins to the best of 
one’s means. The observance of these remedial measures will give deliverance to the 
native from all the evil effects of his inauspicious birth and he will enjoy happiness. 


Ch. 89. Remedies from Nakshatr Birth 


1-7. The Sage Parasara said. O Maitreya! If the birth takes place in the Nakshatras of the 
brother and the parents, death takes place, without doubt, of the brother and the father, or 
mother, or they have to undergo death-like suffering. Therefore I am going to describe 
the remedial measures to be adopted to escape from these evil effects. The remedial rites 
should be performed in a Muhurta, when Candr and stars are favourable on a day, on 
which there is no Rikta-Bhadra Dosha. The remedial rites should be performed in the 
following order. Instal an idol of the Janm Nakshatr on a Kalash in the North-East 
direction from the fire. Cover it with a red piece of cloth and then warp two pieces of 
cloth round it. Worship the idol by 


chanting the Mantras of the Janm Nakshatr. According to one’s Gotra, perform Havan 
108 times with the recitation of the same Mantra, facing the fire, with Ghi and other 
Havan material. Then the priest, performing the Puja, should sprinkle water on the 
parents and brother (whoever is concerned). Give presents in cash (Dakshena) to the 
priest and his colleagues, associated with the ceremony, to the best of one’s means and 
then feed the Brahmins to the best of one’s means. 


Ch. 90. Remedies from Sankranti Birth 


1-2. The Sage said. O Brahmin! The names of the Sankranti on the seven days of the 
week, beginning from Sunday, are Ghora, Dhavankshi, Mahodari, Manda, Mandakini, 
Mishra and Rakshasi. The person, born at the Sankranti (entry of Sirya in a new Rasi), 
is poor and unhappy, but he becomes well-to-do and happy, if remedial measures are 
undertaken. I am now going to describe the remedial measures to nullify these evil 
effects. 


3-6. The Yagya of the nine Grahas should be performed to obtain relief from the evil 
effects of the birth at Sankranti. A clean spot in the eastern part of the house should be 
purified by besmearing with cow dung. Then prepare three separate heaps of the 
following: 5 Dronas (80 Seers) of paddy (Sadhi), 2’ Dronas (40 Seers) of rice, 114 
Dronas (20 Seers) of sesame seeds (Til). On these heaps of grains make a figure of lotus 
with eight leaves (Ashtamdhal) and then decorate them with flowers. After doing this, 
select and invite a priest, who is well versed in the performance of religious rites and 
recitation of Mantras. 


7-18. The religious rites are then to be performed in the following order. Install Kalashas 
without any holes on all the three heaps and put in each of them water from holy places, 
Saptamrattika, Shataushadhi, Panchapallava and Panchagavya. Then wrap the Kalashas 
with pieces of cloth. Place small earthen pots, wrapped with thin cloth, on the Kalashas. 
Then install the idol of Sankranti along with the idol of Adhideva and Pratyadhideva. 
(Here Surya is Adhideva and Candr Pratyadhideva). Their idols should be placed on 
either side of the main idols of Sankranti. Two robes may be given, as offering to each of 
the idols. Perform worship of all the three idols, according to the prescribed procedure. 
The main idol should be worshipped with the chanting of “‘Trayambakam’, ‘Yajam Hai’ 
etc., the idol of Sirya with Mantra ‘Ut Sirya’ and the idol of Candr with Mantra 
‘Apayayashava’ etc. The worship should be performed with Shodshopchar, or 
Panchopchar, as may be possible. After touching the main idol, Mrityunjaya Japa should 
be recited 1008, 108, or 28 times, as may be possible. Make a small platform in the West 
of the installed Kalashas, kindle fire on it and perform the prescribed rites. Then perform 
Havan 1008, 108, or 28 times with Samidha, Ghrit (Ght) and Charu (powder of Til) 
within one’s means along with chanting of ‘Trayambakam’ etc. Mantra. 8) Again 
perform Havan, first with the fuel of sesame seeds along with recitation of Mrityunjaya 
Mantra. After performing another Svistkrita Havan, sprinkle the holy water on the child 
born and his parents. Lastly feed as many Brahmins, as one can afford. By performing 
the remedial rites, described above, the evil effects are nullified and the native and his 
parents enjoy happiness. 


Ch. 91. Remedies for Birth in Eclipses 


1-14. The Sage said. O Brahmin! A person, whose birth takes place at the time of solar, 
or lunar eclipse, suffers from ailments, distress and poverty and faces danger of death. 
Therefore I am going to describe for the benefit of the mankind the remedial measures, 
required to be 


undertaken to nullify the above evil effects. The remedial rites are to be performed in the 
following order. The following idols should be got prepared, according to one’s means: 
in gold an idol of the deity of the Nakshatr, in which the eclipse takes place (regarding 
deities of Nakshatras, see ‘notes’ of verse 18, Ch. 3, Vol. I); in gold an idol of Strya, if 


the birth takes place during solar eclipse; in silver an idol of Candr, if the birth takes 
place during lunar eclipse; in lead an idol of Rahu. Besmear a clean spot on the ground 
(in the house) with cow dung, cover it with a new (unused) beautiful piece of cloth and 
install the three idols on it. Make offerings of the following to the idols: in case of birth 
during solar eclipse all things dear to Strya and red-coloured Akshat (Akshata - rice), 
red sandal, a garland of red-coloured flowers, red clothes etc.; in case of birth during a 
lunar eclipse all things dear to Candr and white sandal, white flowers, white clothes etc.; 
for Rahu blackish clothes, blackish flowers etc.; white flowers for the deity of the 
Nakshatr, in which the eclipse takes place. The worship should be performed, as follows: 
of Strya with the chanting of ‘Akrishnim’ etc. Mantra; of Candr with the chanting of 
‘Imadeva’ etc. Mantra; of Rahu with Durva (a kind of grass) and with the chanting of 
‘Kayanshicatra’ etc. Mantra. Thereafter Havan should be performed, as follows: with the 
fuel of Aak wood pieces for Strya; with the fuel of Palas tree wood pieces for Candr; 
with Durva for Rahu; with Pipal tree wood pieces for the deity of the Nakshatr. Sprinkle 
the holy water of the Kalash on the child born (and his parents). Offer worshipful 
regards to the priest, performing the remedial rites and lastly feed as many Brahmins, as 
possible within one’s means. By performance of the remedial rites in the manner 
described above, evil effects of the inauspicious birth are wiped and the native enjoys 
happiness and is blessed with good fortune. 


Ch. 92. Remedies from Gandanta Birth 


1. The Sage said. O Brahmin! Gandanta is of three kinds, namely of Tithi, Nakshatr and 
Lagn. Birth, travelling and performance of auspicious functions, like marriage etc., 
during Gandanta are likely to cause death of the person concerned. 


2. O Maitreya! The last 2 Ghatikas of Purna Tithi (5th, 10th, 15th) and the first 2 
Ghatikas of Nanda Tithi (1st, 6th, 11th) are known, as Tithi Gandanta. 


3. Similarly the last two Ghatikas of Revati and first two Ghatikas of Ashvini, the last 
two Ghatikas of Aslesha and first two Ghatikas of Magha and the last two Ghatikas of 
Jyeshtha and first two Ghatikas of Mula are known, as Nakshatr Gandanta. 


4. The last half Ghatika of Meen and first half Ghatika of Mesh, the last half Ghatika of 
Kark and first half Ghatika of Simh, the last half Ghatika of Vrischik and first half 
Ghatika of Dhanu are known, as Lagn Gandanta. 


5. Amongst these Gandantas the last 6 Ghatikas of Jyeshtha and first 8 Ghatikas of Mula 
are known, as Abhukta Mula. 


6-8. Now I will tell you the remedial measures to be adopted to release the child, born 
during Gandanta, from its evil effects. The father should see the child born only on the 


morning next to the end of the days of Sutaka, or on any auspicious day after the 
performance of the remedial measures. The remedial measures are giving a bullock in 
charity in the case of Tithi Gandanta, giving a cow with calf in charity in the case of 
Nakshatr Gandanta, giving gold in charity in the case of Lagn Gandanta, performing 
Abhisheka of the child along with father, if 


the birth is in the first part of Gandanta and along with mother, if the birth is in the 
second part of Gandanta. 


9-11. Performance of Puja on the holy Kalash of the idol of the deities of Tithi (in case 
of Tithi Gandanta), Nakshatr (in case of Nakshatr Gandanta) and Lagn (in case of Lagn 
Gandanta), made of 16 Masas, 8 Masas, or 4 Masas of gold, as may be possible, 
followed by Havan and Abhisheka, according to procedure already described earlier. At 
the end as many Brahmins, as may be possible within one’s means, should be fed. These 
remedial measures will ensure long life, good health and prosperity for the child. 


Notes. Unless one is himself fully conversant with the performance of religious rites, the 
remedies, recommended in this chapter, earlier and later chapters, should be got 
performed by and under the directions of a learned priest, because the full effects will be 
derived, if the rites are performed correctly and according to the procedure, prescribed in 
the religious scriptures on this subject. 


Ch. 93. Remedies for Abhukta Mula Birth 


1-2. The Sage Parasara said. The ruling deity of Jyeshtha is Indra and the ruling deity of 
Mula is Rakshasa. As both the deities are inimical to each other, this Gandanta is 
considered, as the most evil. A boy, or girl, born during the period of Abhukta Mula, 
should either be abandoned, or the father should not see the face of the child for 8 years. 
Now I shall describe the remedial measures to obtain deliverence from the evil effects of 
birth during this extremely inauspicious period. 


3-4. In view of the extremely inauspicious effects of birth during Abhukta I shall first 
describe the remedial measures to obtain relief from Mula. The religious remedial rites 
should be performed after the 12th day after the birth, the next Janm Nakshatr day, or on 
an auspicious day, when Candr and the stars are favourable. 


5-8. Erect a canopy (Mandap) with four arched gateways, embellished with festoons, on 
a sacred spot, besmeared with cow dung paste, to the East, or North of the house. 
Prepare there a pit (Kund), or place there a square vessel of clay, or metal for performing 
Havan. Then, according to one’s means, prepare, or get prepared an idol of Rakshasa of 
16, 8, or 4 Masas of gold, as may be possible within one’s means. The idol should be 
with a horrible-looking face, black in colour, with two heads, two arms, carrying a 


sword and a shield and seated on a dead body. 


9. In the absence of an idol a piece of gold of the weight, mentioned above, should be 
used for worship, as gold is dear to all the deities. 


10-20. Thereafter the remedial rites should be performed in the following order. Select a 
learned priest to perform the religious rites, according to the prescribed procedure. 
Install a Kalash and put in it Panchagavya (five articles, yielded by a cow, namely milk, 
curd, Ghi, dung and urine), Shataushadhi and water of the holy river (Ganga etc.). Then 
install the idol of the Rakshasa of Mula, facing West, on an earthen pot (Dhata) with one 
hundred tiny holes. After placing bamboo leaves on it, perform the worship of the idol 
by offering it white flowers, sandal and clothes etc. Also perform worship of its 
Adhideva Indra and Pratyadhideva Jal. Then perform Havan to appease the deities. 
According to one’s means, 1008, or 108 oblations should be offered in the Havan. After 
this to obtain deliverence from 


death Mrityunjaya Mantra etc. should be recited and prayers offered to all the deities for 
the purpose of Abhisheka. The father, mother and the child should thereafter take bath 
from the water of the two Kalashas. Then the parents, dressed in white clothes and with 
white sandal paste, besmeared on their foreheads, should give a cow with calf, as a 
Dakshina to the chief priest and feed the other priests and Brahmins, according to one’s 
means. Lastly, after reciting the ‘Yatapapan’ etc. (see verse 19) Mantra, the father, 
mother and the child should see the reflection of their faces in the (melted) Ghi. By the 
performance of the remedial rites in the manner described all evil effects of the birth 
during Abhukta Mula are completely wiped out. 


Ch. 94. Remedies from Jyeshtha Gandanta Birth 


1-5. The Sage said. O Maitreya! Now I will describe to you the remedial measures to be 
adopted to ensure relief from the evil effects of Jyeshtha Gandanta. The erection of a 
canopy (Mandhup), installation of Kalash, selection of a priest etc. will be done in the 
same manner, as has been recommended for the Abhukta Mula in the previous chapter. 
In this ceremony Indra will be the deity-in-chief, Adhideva will be Agni and the 
Pratyadhideva will be Rakshasa. 


6. Then the remedial rites should be performed in the following order. Install on a 
Kalash, full of paddy rice, an idol of gold with Indra, seated on Airavat with Vajra 
Ankusha in his hands. Perform worship of the chief deity Indra along with that of the 
Adhideva and the Pratyadhideva with the recitation of their appropriate Mantras. 
Perform Havan, Abhisheka and then feed the Brahmins in accordance with one’s means. 
In addition to the above, after doing Indrasukta and Mrityunjaya Japas, prayers may be 
offered to Indra. These measures will wipe out the evil effects of the Gandanta. 


7. In case the performance of remedial rites, described above, is beyond the means of 
any person, he should give a cow in charity. This will also appease the deities and 
promote relief from the evil effects of the Gandanta. Because the giving of a cow in 
charity has been considered a superior remedial measure than giving in charity all the 
lands, belonging to a person. 


8-9. According to prescribed remedial measures, 3 cows are to be given in charity in the 
case of Jyeshtha-Mula and Aslesha-Magha Gandantas, 2 cows in Revati-Ashvini 
Gandantas and | cow in other Gandantas, or in any inauspicious Yog. If cow, or cows 
are not available, their actual value should be given in cash to a Brahmin. 


10. A girl, born in Jyeshtha Nakshatr, destroys (is the cause of death of) the elder brother 
of her husband and a girl, born in fourth quarter of Vishaka Nakshatr, destroys her 
husband’s younger brother. Therefore a cow should be given in charity at the time of the 
marriage of such girls to wipe out the above-mentioned evil effects. 


11-13. A boy, or girl, born in the 2nd, 3rd, or 4th quarter of Aslesha Nakshatr, destroys 
his/her mother-in-law and a boy, or a girl, born in Ist, 2nd, or 3rd quarter of Mula 
Nakshatr, becomes the destroyer of his/her father-in-law. Therefore suitable measures, as 
may be possible within one’s means, should be taken at the time of the marriage of such 
boys and girls. There will be no evil effect, if the husband has no elder brothers. 


Ch. 95. Remedies from Birth of a Daughter after Three Sons 


1-2. The Sage said. O Brahmin! I will now tell you about other kinds of inauspicious 
births. The birth of a daughter after the birth of three sons, or the birth of a son after the 
birth of three daughters is ominous for both the maternal and paternal families of such 
children. Therefore remedial measures, described below, may be taken to get deliverance 
from these evil effects. 


3-9. The rites should be performed on the morning next to the last day of Sutak, or on 
any other auspicious day in the following order. After selecting a priest and some 
Brahmins to perform the remedial religious rites, the priest, after paying obeisance to the 
nine Grahas, should install four Kalashas on a heap of paddy, place the idols of Brahma, 
Vishnu, Mahesha and Indra, made of gold, on them and perform their worship in the 
prescribed manner. A Brahmin (an assistant of the priest), after taking bath etc., should 
recite four Rudra Suktas and the whole of Shanti Sukta. The priest should perform 
Havan with Samidha, Ghi and sesame seeds 1008, 108, or 28 times with the recitation of 
the prescribed Mantras of Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha and Indra. Svistkrata and Purnahuti 
and Abhisheka of the child with his family should be done and presents in cash should 
be given to the priest and his assistants, according to one’s means. The Brahmins should 


be fed. The father and the mother of the child should see their reflections in the Ghi, kept 
in a bronze vessel. Lastly grains and clothes should be distributed to the poor and the 
needy. By the performance of the above remedial rites the evil effects are wiped out and 
the child and his parents etc. enjoy happiness. 


Ch. 96. Remedies from Unusual Delivery 


1-3. The Sage said. O Brahmin! I will now tell you about inauspicious and unusual 
deliveries by women, which are ominous for the village, town and the country. These 
may be of the following kinds. Delivery of a child 2, 3, or 4 months earlier, or later from 
the approximate due date. Delivery of a child without hands, feet, or any other limbs, 
without head, or with two heads. Delivery of an animal-shaped being by a woman, or a 
human-shaped being by an animal. 


4-5. Deliveries of these kinds by women, or cows etc. in a house are ominous for all the 
members of the family, living there. Therefore remedial measures are essential for 
obtaining relief from their evil effects. The best remedial measure will be to abandon 
(turn out from the Bhava) such women and animals (cows, mares etc.). 


6-9. It is considered inauspicious for a girl to become pregnant, or to deliver a child in 
her 15th, or 16th year from birth. If a cow delivers, when Surya is in Simh, or a female 
buffalo delivers, when Strya is in Makar, they are disasterous to their owner and the 
person, who looks after them. Therefore either such cow, or buffalo should be given 
away to a Brahmin, or suitable remedial measures should be taken to escape from the 
above-mentioned evil effects. The remedial measures to be adopted are the same, as 
given in verses 3-9 in Ch. 95. 


10. Thus, whenever there is any kind of Aristha, adoption of appropriate remedial 
measures will ensure long life, happiness and prosperity for the person concerned. 


Ch. 97. Conclusion 


1-4. Maharishi Parasara said. O Brahmin! I have described to you the Jyotish Shastra, as 
narrated by Lord Brahma to the Sage Narada and by Narada to Shaunaka and other 
Sages, from whom I received the knowledge of this Shastra. I have narrated the same 
Jyotish Shastra, which I learnt from them. Do not impart the knowledge of this Shastra 
to one, who is insignificative, slanders, or calumniates others, nor to one, who is not 
intelligent, is wicked and unknown to you. Teach this supreme Vedanga Jyotish Shastra 
only to one, who is gentle and amiable, devoted, truthful, brilliant and well known to 
you. 


5-6. Only that person, who possesses adequate knowledge of time and the positions of 


Grahas and Nakshatras, can understand this Hora Shastra. Only that person, who has 
complete knowledge of the Hora Sastra and who 1s truthful, can make correct 
favourable, or unfavourable predictions. 


7. One, who reads, or listens with attention and devotion to this most excellent Hora 
Shastra, becomes long-lived and is blessed with increase in his strength, wealth and 
good reputation. 


8-9. Thus was narrated by Maharishi Parasara to Maitreya this novel Horasastra, 
containing invaluable and uncommon material from ancient scriptures on Jyotish, for the 
benefit of the world at large. Afterwards it came into usage on the earth and received 
reverence from all. 


10-25. In these verses have been described the subject matters of all the chapters, 
contained in this book and their importance. This information has been given in detail in 
the Table of Contents in Volumes I and II of this book. 